Darryl Sterdan's list of this week's new music.

Jenny Lewis

The Voyager

4 out of 5 stars

Inward. Outward. Upward. Downward. Backward. But ultimately, forward. Like life itself, former Rilo Kiley frontwoman Lewis’s third album is a rich travelogue of experience and emotion. The magical joys of love and devotion, the soul-hardening disappointments of infidelity and breakups, insomnia and the ticking of her biological clock, the struggle for independence and transcendence — they’re all fodder for the former child star-turned-singer-songwriter. And offered up with a narrative vision as focused and clear as her gorgeous voice. Wisely, she counterbalances that lyrical weight with musical lightness, spinning her revelations and reminiscences in the warm, dreamy gauze of classic ’70s California pop-rock a la Rumors-era Fleetwood Mac, but updated with contemporary tones and textures. Confessional and compelling, pretty and sometimes pretty dark, Voyager reminds you that life is a magnificent journey — even if getting there isn’t always half the fun.

Song Reader: Twenty Songs by Beck

Various Artists

4 stars out of 5

The book is always better than the movie. But not better than the album. At least not this time. More than 18 months after eclectic oddball Beck Hansen released his sheet-music collection Song Reader, an equally eclectic roster of artists — including Jack White, Jeff Tweedy, Jarvis Cocker, Norah Jones, fun., Sparks, Jason Isbell, David Johansen, Eleanor Friedberger, Loudon Wainwright III and the author himself — have finally converted all those dots and lines into notes and tunes. Unsurprisingly, many of the tracks retain the wide-eyed dudeness, laconic settings and woozy haze that are the hallmarks of Beck’s work. But thankfully, several artists inject enough of themselves into the mix to elevate this beyond the usual tribute-disc reverence. Cases in point: The blistering southern blues-rock of Isbell’s Now That Your Dollar Bills Have Sprouted Wings; the ominously orchestrated Brit-pop of Cocker’s Eyes That Say ‘I Love You’; the lounge-lizard viper blues of Johansen’s Rough on Rats and Marc Ribot’s Last Polka; the country-honk of Jones’ Just Noise; the weird Americana of White’s I’m Down; the synth-pop grandeur of Sparks’ Why Did You Make Me Care?; the stirring soul of Swamp Dogg’s America, Here’s My Boy; and even the slow-burning Beatle-pop jangle of Beck’s own Heaven’s Ladder. It’s a real page-turner.

Eric Clapton & Friends

The Breeze: An Appreciation of JJ Cale

3.5 stars out of 5

If anyone should appreciate JJ Cale, it’s Eric Clapton. Tulsa’s titan of twang supplied Slowhand with at least two of his biggest hits — After Midnight and Cocaine — plus a handful of other tunes. They even joined forces on 2006’s Grammy-winning Road to Escondido. So no wonder Clapton is behind this tribute disc to the late great singer-songwriter, who died of heart failure in July 2013. But as the handle above notes, he didn’t do it alone. A roster of like-minded pickers and players — including Tom Petty, Mark Knopfler, John Mayer, Willie Nelson, Derek Trucks and more — drop by to help recreate the lazy, Dustbowl-blues minimalism of Cale classics like Lies, Cajun Moon, Don’t Wait and others, along with a few leftovers Cale never released. Sure, it sounds exactly like what you expect. But why wouldn’t it? After all, there ain’t no changin’ the weather, and there ain’t no changin’ JJ. Which is just as it should be.

NOW HEAR THIS

The Raveonettes

Pe’ahi

3.5 stars out of 5

Waves of emotion. And guitar. The shoegazing Dutch duo have seldom sounded heavier — both sonically and lyrically — than they do on their seventh disc. Reportedly inspired by the death of frontman Sune Rose Wagner’s father, and taking its title from a Hawaiian surf mecca, the richly dymanic 10-song set melts their usual icy countenance with massive waves of distorted guitars that crash against the rocky shores of reality. Death and heartbreak should always sound so seductive.

5 Seconds of Summer

5 Seconds of Summer

2.5 stars out of 5

Yes, they’re a boy band — with all the teen-love tripe, sugary harmonies and silly hair it entails. But at least these Australian pretty boys are an actual band whose members play instruments, write at least part of their own songs and inject a dash of punk-pop grit into all that syrupy sweetness. So it could be worse. Hope they enjoy their moment in the sun while it lasts.

La Roux

Trouble in Paradise

3 stars out of 5

Make that Trouble AND Paradise. La Roux’s Elly Jackson has seen the former — since hitting big with her Grammy-winning 2009 debut, she’s dealt with panic attacks, writer’s block and the departure of partner Ben Langmaid. But to her credit, she still finds some heaven on her long-overdue second disc. Trading her icy ’80s synth-pop for a sunnier reggae-disco vibe that recalls everyone from Bowie and Cyndi to Bananarama, the singer and multi-instrumentalist not only moves toward the light — she gets you moving too.

Common

Nobody’s Smiling

3.5 stars out of 5

It’s a long way from the ’hood to the penthouse. But veteran rapper-turned-actor Common tries to bridge that gap with a concept disc about gun violence plaguing his Chicago hometown, voiced with grim intensity and peppered with cameos by up-and-coming homeboys. Depending on your view, these dark, starkly propulsive tracks — skillfully produced by No I.D. — are his most relevant and focused work in years, or an out-of-touch artist’s flawed bid to re-up his cred. Either way, fitting title.

Madlib

Rock Konducta

3.5 stars out of 5

Less a Konducta than a Kratedigga. Prolifically eclectic DJ Otis Jackson gets deep into a ’70s groove, stringing nearly 90 minutes of audio oddities — from obscure prog, psyche and Krautrock instrumentals to National Lampoon comedy bits and movie samples — into one long, strange trip down a rabbit hole of head-nodding introspection. Get out the headphones.

Freeman

Freeman

3.5 stars out of 5

Gener’s gone straight. But he doesn’t always play it straight. Aaron Freeman’s first new songs since fleeing Ween find the recovering addict balancing the wonderfully weird wordplay of old for with frank confessions, self-help messages and odes to spirituality — all to the strains of sweet ’70s folk-pop with Eastern overtones. Boognish would dig it. Ditto Donovan and Cat Stevens.

Earthless Meets Heavy Blanket

In a Dutch Haze

3.5 stars out of 5

Four heads are better than one. Especially when one of them belongs to HB (and Dino Jr) guitarist J Mascis, whose rifftastic shredding drives the hour-long jam that results from this momentous meeting of ’70s stoner-rock minds.

Deke Dickerson & The Trashmen

Bringing Back the Trash

3 stars out of 5

He’s the L.A twangmeister guitarist. They’re the Minnesota surf-garage legends. Together they bash out bare-bones rockabilly classics and originals full of the T-Men’s outlandish vocals and echo effects, topped with Dekester’s fretboard chops. Bird is still the word.

Alvvays

Alvvays

3 stars out of 5

Today’s forecast: Mostly sunny with cloudy periods. The former is found in the summery melodies, breezy surf-pop jangle and gently rocking beats that dominate this Toronto quintet’s debut. The latter surfaces in the layers of fuzz and noise that creep around the periphery, along with the bittersweet undercurrents that shade Molly Rankin’s girly, chilled vocals. (And yes, she’s one of those Rankins.) If you dig Best Coast, you’ll love Alvvays. Rain or shine.

OLDIES OF THE WEEK

The Beatles

Meet the Beatles: The Japan Box

4 stars out of 5

It’s all about the packaging. And that’s OK. In fact, it’s actually fab. Beatlemaniacs, completists and collectors will say domo arigato for this five-CD box assembled to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the group’s 1964 arrival in Japan. On the musical side, it’s no big whoop — just Meet the Beatles, Second Album, A Hard Day’s Night and Help!, along with the Japan-only release No. 5. And while some of the albums have different songs and sequencing than their British and North American counterparts, there’s nothing you haven’t heard a million times. The real appeal of the set is the presentation. To wit: Painstakingly authentic reproductions of all five original LPs, from cover art, Odeon Records labels and liner notes to inserts, lyric sheets and Japanese spine wraps — all enclosed in thick glossy cardboard sleeves, individual plastic bags, and a heavy duty slipcase (that comes in its own plastic bag). One quibble: The 96-page booklet is mostly in Japanese. Another quibble: The $130 price tag. But hey, it’s not like anybody ever said the best things in life were free.

Jethro Tull

A Passion Play: An Extended Performance

3.5 stars out of 5

Sometimes you don’t know what you want until you get it. Case in point: This four-disc upgrade of Ian Anderson and Jethro Tull’s 1973 concept album A Passion Play. Structured as a four-act musical play that consists of a single shape-shifting song chronicling the afterlife of an unnamed protagonist, it was reportedly cobbled together over a couple of weeks after months of recordings were scrapped due to technical problems and bandmembers’ dissatisfaction. They weren’t the only ones; although it hit No. 1 in the U.S., APP is not seen as one of the art-proggers’ high points. But that hasn’t stopped them from giving it the deluxe treatment with this affordable $45 package, which includes the original album and the aborted sessions in stereo, high-fidelity audio and 5.1 surround — all refurbished by Porcupine Tree mastermind and go-to reissue helmer Steven Wilson. Toss in a whimsical video for the freaky fable The Story of the Hare Who Lost His Spectacles — along with an 80-page book of liner notes, lyrics and umpteen essays on the album, the tour, the studio, the remixes and just about everything else associated with the event — and it’s clear this Passion Play was a labour of love.

Dream Theater

The Studio Albums 1992-2011

3 stars out of 5

Well, you can’t accuse them of false advertising. This 11-CD box contains exactly what it says: The American progressive-metal stalwarts’ entire studio output from their second disc Images and Words to their second-last album A Dramatic Turn of Events — more than 12 hours of Rush-like complexity and virtuosity in one simple box. But that simplicity is also the problem. The 10 albums (including the 2002 double-set Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence) come in bare-bones cardboard sleeves without any inserts, liner notes or lyrics. Nor do you get a book, a DVD or bonus tracks of any sort. So while the $70 package is an economical way to own the bulk of their back catalog, this is not a case where less turns out to be more.

IN THE PIPELINE

Aug. 12

Kris Allen

Horizons

The Byrds

Straight for the Sun: 1971 College Radio Broadcast

Dilated Peoples

Directors of Photography

Gaslight Anthem

Get Hurt

Grant Hart

Every Everything: The Music, Life & Times of Grant Hart DVD

Ethan Johns

The Reckoning

Caleb Johnson

Testify

Lucero

Live From Atlanta

Sinéad O’Connor

I’m Not Bossy, I’m the Boss

The Polyphonic Spree

Psychphonic

Brian Setzer

Rockabilly Riot! All Original

SOJA

Amid the Noise and Haste

Tank

Stronger

Twista

Dark Horse