(Jacquelyn Martin/Associated Press)

Once again, we are presenting a list of our 10 most popular fact checks of the past year.

The most widely read column of the year was the “flip-flop” awarded to President Obama for claiming that his position on using executive action had not changed. This resulted in a rare awarding of an upside-down Pinocchio. Interestingly, Obama’s claim also made it on the finalist list for PolitiFact’s Lie of the Year.

No. 10 on the most-read list is also flip-flop — awarded to Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), Obama’s rival in the 2008 election. Indeed, for the first time, only one of the 10 most-read fact checks received a Four-Pinocchio ruling.

Four of the most widely read columns concerned Republican claims about the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, which not surprising given that the law was featured in many campaign ads during the 2014 midterm elections. Indeed, in contrast to 2013, when a majority of the most-read columns concerned Democratic claims, in 2014 an overwhelming number were about GOP claims.

In compiling this list, we focused on full fact checks of specific claims. Otherwise, The Fact Checker’s round-up of claims made by President Obama in the State of the Union address or the Biggest Pinocchios of the Year would have easily qualified for the top 10 list. As a bonus, we also included at the end the popular video we produced on the biggest presidential deceptions in recent decades.

Click on the headline if you want to read the full column.

1: Obama’s royal flip-flop on using executive action on illegal immigration

We examined a series of statements President Obama had made saying his hands were tied on using executive action on immigration, after he claimed that he had been asked specifically about replicating legislation stalled in Congress. But it turned out that he was asked about specific actions, which he previously had said could not be done unless he was “king” or “the emperor.” Thus we concluded he had flip-flopped.





2: A story too good to check: Paul Ryan and the tale of the brown paper bag

This column came close to being first and ranks as one of the most widely read Fact Checkers ever. It even attracted attention in Kuwait. We examined a tale that Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) told at the Conservative Political Action Conference about a boy who supposedly did not want a government-provided school lunch but “wanted his own lunch, one in a brown-paper bag just like the other kids.” The story quickly collapsed under scrutiny and earned Four Pinocchios.





3: Giuliani’s claim that 93 percent of black murder victims are killed by other blacks

Context often matters. During a debate over the fatal shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani asserted that 93 percent of blacks are killed by other blacks, without acknowledging that the statistic is roughly similar for white-on-white murders. Thus he earned Two Pinocchios, though some readers vehemently disagreed with the ruling.





4: No, CBO did not say Obamacare will kill 2 million jobs

This column helped explain a complex finding in a Congressional Budget Office report that the health-care law, over time, will shrink the workforce by the equivalent of 2 million full-time workers. This was a huge increase from a previous estimate , but it was widely misinterpreted by both the news media and Republican operatives. Some jobs will go away, but the actual number is unclear because of the unknown interaction between part-time and full-time work. Analysts can make a credible case that this is still a negative — just as advocates for the law can claim the law gives people the option not to work.





5: Ted Cruz’s ‘biggest lie in politics:’ Is it actually the truth?

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) repeatedly tells audiences that it is the “biggest lie in politics” that Republicans are “the party of the rich.” In his speeches, Cruz never really explains why he believes this is the “biggest lie.” So we looked at the available data on voting patterns, voter perceptions and income growth — and found his assertion wanting. Without more evidence, Cruz simply can’t make a sweeping statement that saying Republicans are the party of the rich is “the biggest lie” when decades of economic data show the poor do better under Democrats, that the rich tend to vote Republican, and that most Americans believe Republican policies favor the rich. Needless to say, readers split sharply on the merits of this fact check.





6: Julie Boonstra’s claim her Obamacare plan is ‘unaffordable’ gets downgraded to Three Pinocchios

Our original February column on an Americans for Prosperity ad featuring a Michigan cancer victim, Julie Boonstra, appears on this list in eighth place. In March, new information came to light about her medical plan under the Affordable Care Act, indicating that rather than the plan being “unaffordable,” as the ad asserted, she actually had saved more than $1,200 a year. So we switched the rating from Two to Three Pinocchios, and the updated ruling resulted in one of the most widely read columns of the year.





7: How did Rand Paul’s son end up on Medicaid?

This column examined Sen. Rand Paul’s story about how his oldest son tried to get health insurance via the Kentucky version of Obamacare and ended up on Medicaid, the federal-state health-care program for the poor. We initially rated this a “verdict pending,” but after receiving screen grabs from the Kentucky insurance exchange, we concluded that there were too many holes in the Kentucky Republican’s recounting and awarded him Two Pinocchios.





8: A hard-hitting anti-Obamacare ad makes a claim that doesn’t add up

Julie Boonstra again! This was one of a series of columns that looked at the claims in ads sponsored by the pro-GOP group Americans for Prosperity. All of them had various issues in terms of facts and context. In this case, Michigan resident Julie Boonstra left the impression that she lost her doctor when her insurance was canceled (she did not) and claimed that her new insurance left her with “unaffordable” out-of-pocket costs. But her math did not add up.





9: Obama’s claim that George H.W. Bush gave relief to ’40 percent’ of undocumented immigrants

A key selling point for Obama’s immigration action is that George H.W. Bush took a similar step that affected 1.5 million people — roughly the same percentage of illegal immigrants at the time as Obama’s actions. But we demonstrated that virtually all of the Bush administration estimates at the time were significantly lower than 1.5 million. Indeed, the estimate given at the announcement of the policy was just 100,000. This column, which ultimately resulted in an award of Three Pinocchios, was criticized by advocates of the president’s action.





10: Did John McCain flip-flop on the Bergdahl deal?

We took a detailed look at the question of whether Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) supported a trade of five Taliban fighters for Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl back in February, only to turn around and denounce it once the deal was made. McCain may have thought he left himself an out when he said his support was dependent on the details. But the most important detail — the identity of the prisoners — was known at the time he indicated his support. McCain earned an upside-down Pinocchio, constituting a flip-flop.





Special bonus: Presidential deceptions — and their consequences

Here, we presented our list of the biggest presidential deceptions in the past 55 years, from Dwight Eisenhower to Barack Obama. Every president ended up on the list except Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter — and Richard Nixon received a double mention. A video accompanied this column, which showed not only the deceptions but also the mea culpas that came after the truth emerged.

What do Nixon, Reagan, Clinton, Bush and Obama have in common? All have lied -- and faced the political fallout. Truth Teller meets Throwback Thursday to take a look back at those deceptive moments. (Julie Percha/The Washington Post)





(About our rating scale)

Send us facts to check by filling out this form

Follow The Fact Checker on Twitter and friend us on Facebook