BY: Follow @Google_Kugle20



President Obama said in February during a press conference in California that he doesn’t believe Donald Trump will be president. Obama also said that the office of the presidency is more than just a reality show and marketing.

“I continue to believe Mr. Trump will not be president,” Obama said. “It’s not hosting a talk show, or a reality show. It’s not promotion, it’s not marketing.”

Before running for president, Trump was a prominent real estate mogul who was well known for promoting a wide array of products. He was also the host of the NBC reality television show The Apprentice. Now the former reality star is the frontrunner for the Republican Party.

While Obama criticized Trump for his reality show and his constant self-promotion, the past seven years the president has appeared on a number of reality and talk shows. Many times in these appearances, Obama was promoting items from his political agenda. For instance, Obama appeared on the show “Between Two Ferns,” a spoof celebrity interview show, to promote the Affordable Care Act.

Obama was criticized for the whimsical appearance, which past presidents may have skipped. Obama defended his decision to do the show.

In another instance, Obama allowed three “YouTube celebrities” to interview him after one of his State of the Union addresses. One of the interviewers was YouTube star Glozell, who is best known for her “Cereal Challenge” video, where she sat in a bathtub full of milk and Fruit Loops and tried to eat the Fruit Loops while they floated in the tub.

Obama has been a frequent guest of late night TV shows and has been a guest on some reality shows, including “Running Wild With Bear Grylls.”

If Donald Trump is elected president, he wouldn’t be the first celebrity to hold elected office. Television star Jerry Springer, comedian Al Franken, wrestler Jesse Ventura, and movie star Arnold Schwarzenegger all were elected to public office. President Ronald Reagan was an actor before being elected as governor of California and later president.