Topics: aol_on, Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Hillary Clinton, Obamacare, Supreme Court, News, Politics News

At a campaign event last Tuesday, Hillary Clinton was asked if she would consider appointing Barack Obama to the Supreme Court. “Wow, what a great idea. No one has ever suggested that to me, I love that, wow,” she replied. “He may have a few other things to do, but I tell you that’s a great idea.”

This hypothetical raises three questions: Would putting Obama on the Court be a good thing for President Clinton to do, would his nomination be approved by the Senate, and would he take the job?

As to the first question, the answer is clearly “maybe.” Obama has what have come to be thought of as typical qualifications for being on the Court – he was the head of the Harvard Law Review, he taught constitutional law at an elite university – but he also has something else: significant experience as an elected official.

It used to be considered a major plus for Supreme Court nominees to have personal experience in electoral politics. For example, Earl Warren, considered by many to be the greatest justice of the 20th century, was governor of California before joining the Court. And there’s even a precedent for the appointment a former president: William Howard Taft was Chief Justice during the 1920s.

In recent decades, the practice of appointing former politicians to the Court has lapsed: the last justice with any experience in elected office was Sandra Day O’Connor, who joined the Court 35 years ago. Nominating Obama would be a good way of moving back toward the healthy custom of having at least one justice on the Court who has seen the political world from the inside.

But putting Obama on the Court has downsides for progressives as well. Justice Obama wouldn’t be able to campaign for candidates; he couldn’t play the role of an ambassador for the Democrats; he wouldn’t, in short, be able to do all sorts of things that ex-presidents can do to help the political causes they support.

Furthermore, he would have to recuse himself – not vote – in cases involving decisions he had taken while president. (Consider the irony of Obama not being able to provide the deciding vote to keep the Affordable Care Act from being gutted by yet another lawsuit attacking it, because he had signed the original legislation).