Spartans enter state 20-5, riding 10-game winning streak

Berthoud's Madi White (11) and Hannah Atkinson (10) go up to block Mesa Ridge's Kylee Shook Saturday at BHS for the 4A Region 8 tournament. The Spartans qualified for state for the first time since 2008. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

BERTHOUD — Hannah Atkinson doesn't want to sound cocky, but she was positive Berthoud would make it to state.

She knew it from the very beginning, because there was something about this group of Spartans unlike years previous.

"We've been a different team than we've ever been," the senior said. "There's a different level of communication on the court and there's a team aspect that's just different from any other year. I hate to say it, but I saw it."

It was a bold premonition for a team that hasn't been to the big dance since 2008, or as Atkinson put it "like 80 years ago."

But on the most critical day of the entire season, host Berthoud refused to flinch in the face of pressure, winning the 4A Region 8 tournament to punch its ticket to the state tournament for the first time in six years.

Maybe they all knew they were a state-worthy club, but the reaction after the Spartans (20-5, 12-2 Tri-Valley) received the regional championship trophy was sheer bliss.

Somewhere deep inside the throng of black jerseys clambering for a chance to touch the trophy someone screams, "We're going to state!" The voice is met by a universal shriek.

"Right now, honestly, I can't even put it into words. We've worked so hard to get here and we've never made it this far," senior Madi White said, taking her turn clutching the trophy in her arms. "To end your senior year going to state, and hopefully going far into state, it is huge. We are all over the moon."

Advertisement

The No. 8 Spartans handled business in their first game to beat No. 29 Mesa Ridge 3-0 (25-21, 25-22, 25-17), leaving a single match against No. 17 Durango between them and their dream.

After dispatching the Demons rather easily in the first set 25-15, Berthoud found a dogfight in sets two and three, needing a comeback down 23-22 to pull off a 25-23 win to seize a 2-0 advantage.

However, a down-to-the-wire third set went Durango's way, although not without plenty of drama. Trailing 25-23, Berthoud scored two quick points to lead 24-23 and appeared to have the perfect winner set up when a set was served on a platter for Atkinson (15 kills, 25 on the day) — the Spartans' most dangerous hitter — but the Demons blocked her attempt before winning 27-25.

It prolonged the match for Durango, yet it only worked against the Demons who woke up the demon inside Berthoud.

"We get really mad when we lose, especially in a season where we've had a lot more wins than losses," White said after recording 10 kills and three blocks. "Whenever we do lose a close set like that, I think it just fuels all of us. In the huddle we just said, 'This is life or death. This game today decides if we go to state or if we don't meet again.' No one was ready to end this season."

Berthoud's Shaylee Pierick (4) hits a kill while teammate Alyssa Peacock (2) looks on Saturday at the 4A Region 8 tournament at BHS. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Berthoud laid the hammer down on Durango in the fourth set, jumping out to a 20-6 lead before eventually sealing the accomplishment 25-10.

Now the Spartans head to the state tournament winners of 10 consecutive matches, having not lost since Oct. 2. Coach Daisha Agho desired this experience so badly for her team, especially her three senior captains Alyssa Peacock, White and Atkinson.

"As a coach, that's all you're wanting. That's your hope and goal. You talk about it, and I don't know if they really grasp it or understand what it means," she said. "These seniors deserve it. They've led this team, that's why they're the captains. Kudos to them. This really is in honor of them."

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller