Chuck Bowen, left, points to where the Indian camp was located for Channel 4 CBS producer Doug Whitehead. ( Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Part two of a three-part series on the Sand Creek Massacre.

In the morning of Nov. 29, 1864, the pounding the thousands of hooves alerted young Indians that were posted to keep an eye on their horses. At first, they thought that a herd of buffalo was coming their way, which would have meant good news and plenty of food. Instead, what they saw in a cloud of dust were Chivington's men.

As written in 1881 by Charles W. Bowman, "The Indians were asleep in their lodges, their ponies grazing on the hillsides, the American flag flying from the tent of the head chief, Black Kettle ... A rush was made upon the camp, and the Indians, completely surprised, awoke to meet death and resisted it as best they could. They were shot down as fast as found. The soldiers at first found easy work, but the Indians, within a few minutes, began to defend themselves with their bows and arrows, but, before the superior weapons and overwhelming numbers, they were as nothing."

The mounted soldiers rode right into the camp. Black Kettle stood in front of his teepee holding up the American flag. He told his people not to be afraid and that they would not be hurt. Just then, the soldiers opened fire as the women began to scream. They carried their babies and children to Black Kettle's teepee for safety.

Other Cheyenne leaders, such as White Antelope, came toward the advancing soldiers saying in plain English, "Stop, Stop!" As White Antelope fell from a gunshot, he sang his death song, "Nothing lives long, only the earth and the mountains."

Left Hand tried to lead his small band of Arapahos to Black Kettle's teepee. When he saw the troops, he stood still with his arms folded and was shot dead. As squaws and children ran, they were gunned down at point blank range, so close that their wounds were surrounded by powder burns.

Advertisement

One observer, powerless to stop the slaughter, later recalled that 30 to 40 Indian women tried to hide in a small depression in the sand. They sent a young girl of about 6 out with a white flag. She had not taken but a few steps when she was shot dead.

The soldiers then fired into the depression until all the women and children died. Most of the Indians did not offer any resistance and were not armed, however, during the battle some soldiers did die.

Robert Bent, one of the unwilling members of Chivington's party, related graphic details of what happened after the slaughter.

A little girl was found hidden in the sand. The soldier who found her pulled out his revolved, and shot her. He then jerked her small body out of the sand. One pregnant squaw was cut open and her unborn child pulled out and left to die.

After White Antelope was killed, his body was stripped and his private parts were cut off. The soldier involved in this mutilation boasted that he was going to make the scrotum into a tobacco pouch.

Females were also mutilated, and one squaw's private parts were cut out and exhibited at the end of a pole. The atrocities continued until every Indian had been scalped or mutilated. Probably with a look of satisfaction, Col. Chivington just stood by and watched. In the end, 105 women and children lay dead along with 28 men.

As incredulous as its sounds, the headlines in the Rocky Mountain News on Dec. 8, 1864, read, "Great Battle with Indians! The Savages Dispersed! 500 Indians Killed. Our Loss: 9 Killed, 38 Wounded." The primary source for this account was none other than Col. John Chivington.

Shell fragments and musket balls were among the artifacts discovered, logged and GPS located by the Bowens north of the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site. The widely scattered artifacts illustrates that the massacre raged on for several miles. (Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

The article quoted him as saying, "I, at daylight this morning, attacked a Cheyenne village of one hundred and thirty lodges from nine hundred to one thousand warriors strong. We killed chiefs Black Kettle, White Antelope and Little Robe, and between four and five hundred other Indians."

This was touted as the greatest victory over Indians west of the Missouri River. A grand parade was held for Chivington's men through the streets of Denver. Some of the men even appeared as guests between theater acts, showed their Indian scalps and describe their "brave" deeds.

This distortion and lies about the Sand Creek massacre could not be suppressed. It became known that one of Chivington's captains refused to fight, and some of the officers and men felt badly over the role they had played. Several reported what happened to Army headquarters in Washington, D.C.

Before the month had ended, the people of Colorado Territory were stunned to learn that Chivington and his men had murdered defenseless women and children. The public also learned of the hideous mutilations as the Indians' side of the story emerged.

This was but one incident among many in the systematic elimination of Indians from the American West. Millions of dollars were spent on what became known as the Indian Wars. Except in magnitude, it was not unlike the extermination of 6 million Jews by Hitler during World War II.

The genocide at Sand Creek has not died. As expressed by Chief Robert Tabor, of the Cheyenne-Arapaho in Oklahoma, "Never has justice been done to satisfy the spirits of those slain."

There is a monument to mark the Sand Creek Massacre, however, the area proved to be void of artifacts. Under legislation signed into law by President Clinton, the Department of the Interior was charged with determining the actual site. Since the ground is sacred, the law also required that all work be done in cooperation with the Arapaho and Cheyenne.

After the expenditure of a third of a million dollars, the actual Sand Creek massacre site was discovered. Using metal detectors, a National Park Service team of archaeologists located and dug up 300 or so dented bullets, spent cartridges, shell fragments from howitzers, tin bells that once decorated Indian clothing and other similar items.

Chuck and Sheri Bowen, owners of the Bowen Ranch north of the official Sand Creek Massacre site, started their own investigation and to date, have logged over 3,000 artifacts, most related to the Indian encampment and the battle itself.

It is abundantly clear that the fighting started near the present-day visitors center and raged north on either side of the creek bed. It is estimated that as the Indians tried to escape the slaughter, the battle spread for miles along the creek bed.

Among the findings made by the Bowens are fragments of howitzer shells that shredded the tents and those inside. Musket balls, bullets and shell casings were also recovered.

Next in this series is "Dedication of the Sand Creek Massacre site — Part Three"

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.