The state’s largest health insurer is licking its wounds from a costly financial mishap.

Meet and greet Alexander Chatfield Burns is a recent South Carolina resident, but he’s already met the state’s chief executive at least twice. The former co-founder of Southport Lane Management — he resigned from the firm in early 2014 — attended a December 2012 holiday reception at the Governor’s Mansion Complex in Columbia, where he was photographed with Gov. Nikki Haley. He came as the guest of an invitee. “Mr. Burns never requested assistance with any insurance matters from the administration,” Haley spokesman Rob Godfrey said in a statement Friday. Burns also held a fundraiser for Haley at his New York office on Sept. 24, 2013, to support her re-election campaign. The event raised $26,500. The figure was reported last weekend by The Wall Street Journal. “There was no state business discussed or asked of the governor or her team,” Godfrey said. Ray Farmer, director of the S.C. Department of Insurance, said he thinks he met Burns once, shortly after Haley appointed Farmer to run the state agency in November 2012. “It was a conversation of no more than five minutes,” Farmer said Thursday. “It was a meet-and-greet.”

BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina has fired an aggressive legal volley to recover perhaps tens of millions of dollars a subsidiary lost in a disastrous series of investments. The money evaporated over the past two years in deals involving a New York firm that’s now on life support.

BlueCross filed court papers on behalf of its former Companion Property & Casualty Insurance unit about a week ago. The Columbia-based company unloaded that division in January, but it retained the rights to sue the only deep pockets left in the dispute. The complaint alleges US Bank NA shirked its fiduciary duties by allowing high-grade bonds and other Companion holdings valued at nearly $180 million to be swapped out for a hodgepodge of mostly obscure investments that have been found to be either difficult to value or entirely worthless.

Among the questionable investments: a biblical painting.

The case also involves New York’s Southport Lane Management, a foundering private equity firm that was led by Alexander Chatfield Burns until early last year. That company’s dealings and financial troubles were detailed in a front-page article last weekend in The Wall Street Journal. Burns, 28, now lives in downtown Charleston. Efforts to reach him at his apartment building off King Street last week were unsuccessful. He and his former company are not named in the BlueCross lawsuit.

Formed in 2010, Southport invested in insurance companies. Its businesses included a pair of entities that established a “fronting” relationship with BlueCross in late 2012. Under that deal, Southport-owned Redwood Reinsurance and Dallas National Insurance were paid a fee to take on some of the risk from Companion’s policies. New accounts were set up to hold stocks, bonds and other liquid investments that could be quickly sold to pay claims and other obligations in the event Redwood or Dallas National ever became insolvent.

US Bank was the trustee, sort of a third-party referee. In that role, it was responsible for ensuring any assets Redwood and Dallas National bought, sold or otherwise transferred in the accounts were of “comparable value,” according to the lawsuit. Also, Companion said US Bank was required to provide accurate monthly statements showing the fair-market value of the investments.

By last March, the holdings either were “worth far less” than reported or appeared “to have little or no value,” the BlueCross subsidiary said in the lawsuit. Its lawyers are alleging US Bank was negligent for allowing the accounts, including “reputable” bonds and stocks, to “be depleted.” The original $84 million cash contribution is down to $369,000,

About $86 million in assets were transferred into a handful of obscure businesses, with names like Vapor Holdings, Termite Offshore Services and Xtreme Gas & Oil, now known as Massive Interactive, court records show. Companion money also was put into a fund known as Destra that claims to own, among other assets, the rights to a painting by 16th-century Italian master Michelangelo Caravaggio called “David in the Act of Picking up Goliath’s Severed Head.” Both the authenticity and value of the purported work are in question.

Burns and Southport Lane aren’t named as defendants in the BlueCross complaint. Nor is Redwood or Dallas National. The latter, renamed Freestone Insurance, failed last year and is being liquidated.

BlueCross didn’t specify how much it’s hoping to recover from US Bank. It’s seeking actual, punitive and triple damages. Spokeswoman Patti Embry-Tautenham said in a statement that the company is “taking all necessary steps to protect our rights in this matter.”

US Bank did not respond to a request for comment.

William B. Kerr, Burns’ attorney, said in a statement that his client “has no involvement” in the lawsuit “and as a result, we do not think it appropriate for him to speculate upon what another party may or may not have done.”

A Bermuda company bought Companion on Jan. 27 and renamed it Sussex Insurance last month. The Wall Street Journal, citing financial filings it obtained, said the ex-BlueCross unit reported a $113 million loss before it was sold.

Ray Farmer, director of the S.C. Department of Insurance, said the red ink never threatened the solvency of either Companion or its now-former owner.

“That was never in question,” he said.

Contact John McDermott at 937-5572.