KANSAS CITY, Mo. — When Aqib Talib couldn’t play Sunday night because of a strained hamstring, it set up a pronounced matchup: The inept Kansas City Chiefs receivers, who had not caught a touchdown pass through their first 11 games, against the injury-riddled Broncos cornerbacks.

Besides Talib, a starter at left cornerback who generally matches up against the opponent’s best receiver, the Broncos also were without their No. 4 corner, Kayvon Webster, who was out after dislocating his right shoulder last week against Miami.

Talib maintained his dubious streak of never playing all 16 games in any of his seven NFL seasons. He tweaked his hamstring early in the Broncos’ 39-36 victory last week against Miami.

With Talib out, rookie Bradley Roby joined Chris Harris as the Broncos’ starting corners. Tony Carter, a veteran who was inactive the previous three games, jumped into the No. 3 cornerback role, with Harris moving inside to the nickel spot.

Omar Bolden was the Broncos’ No. 4 and final cornerback.

J.T. update. Julius Thomas‘ left ankle did not come around this week as hoped. The tight end, who had a league-most 12 touchdown receptions through the first nine games, did not dress for a second consecutive game Sunday against the Chiefs.

Virgil Green, a superior blocker, was the Broncos’ starting tight end for a second consecutive week. Jacob Tamme also received playing time at the “off” or receiving tight end position.

Kickoff issues. Connor Barth made his place-kicking debut for the Broncos. He made his two short field goals of 22 and 24 yards in the first half, but his kickoffs were a problem.

None got close to the end zone, much less for a touchback as the Chiefs got out past their 30-yard line on all four first-half kickoff returns.

Sanders saluted. Before Emmanuel Sanders became one of the league’s most explosive receivers, before he pushed for his first Pro Bowl berth, he was a Pittsburgh Steeler competing with Antonio Brown to get a uniform.

“Two dogs, one bone,” Sanders said of coach Mike Tomlin’s weekly advice to them.

Hines Ward remembers Sanders, who remained a key third-down weapon Sunday, for his attention to detail. The NBC broadcaster and former Steelers star talked with Sanders on the field before Sunday’s game.

“What I always appreciated about him is how hard he worked. He would come to me and ask to do drills after practice,” Ward said of workouts that have continued in Denver. “He just needed an opportunity. The thing I stressed to him is to learn all the positions. You can play in this league a long time if you can play all the receiver positions and run all the routes, not just on the outside.”

Footnotes. Bolden continues to gain traction on special teams. He recovered a third-quarter fumble after Britton Colquitt‘s short punt ricocheted off Marcus Cooper. … Broncos guard Ben Garland, a former Air Force star, mocked the 20-degree weather, wearing a sleeveless shirt and shorts in early pregame warm-ups. … Broncos defensive tackle Marvin Austin, inactive last week, was back on the game-day roster Sunday against Jamaal Charles and the run-heavy Chiefs. … Offensive lineman Chris Clark, who started at right tackle in Denver’s first five games, was inactive for a second consecutive game. … Paul Cornick was Denver’s “swing” backup at offensive tackle, behind starters Ryan Clady and Louis Vasquez.