According to a news release issued by the hospital, “Southern Palmetto will end patient services January 21, 2016, and temporarily cease operations. The current ownership is seeking alternatives for the continuation of healthcare in the community though no plans for the future have been approved.”

The hospital was purchased by S.C. Healthcare Investments LLC in 2013 from Barnwell County.

As of Wednesday morning, there are only six patients admitted to the hospital, said CEO Michael Patterson. The hospital’s 90 full-time and 28 part-time employees were notified starting Tuesday afternoon of plans to cease emergency room operations as of noon Thursday.

“We will still take care of the patients until they are able to be moved or released,” even past Thursday’s deadline, Patterson said.

Patterson said the final decision was made Monday. Employees were first notified at a meeting Tuesday afternoon.

After rumors began circulating Tuesday afternoon, The People-Sentinel in Barnwell learned that county officials were not notified of the impending closure. Asked why, Patterson said he felt it was “important to tell the employees first.”

Employees will receive two weeks’ severance pay. Patterson said retirement funds are in a 401(k) plan. He also said SC Works, the state employment agency, is being notified of the situation.

As to why the hospital is closing, the release stated, “There has been a decline in hospital volumes over the past years to the point that maintaining a full service hospital for the current demand from acute and emergency patients is not sustainable. The hospital has been operating with losses from operations despite efforts to improve efficiency, collections and the facility. In the most recent year, the hospital lost $2.5 million from operations due to a low patient census and uncompensated care.”

Patterson said that ambulance services responding to calls are required to take patients to the nearest hospital and that it will be up to them to determine which facility is nearest. Hospitals closest to Barnwell County include Allendale, Aiken and Orangeburg.

Patterson said the state and licensing agencies have been notified.

Southern Palmetto Hospital, formerly Barnwell County Hospital, has served the Barnwell community for more than 60 years.