The lawsuit by Speaker John Boehner against the Obama administration argues the president overstepped his legal authority when he altered the Affordable Care Act. Getty Images

House Republicans on Friday filed a lawsuit against the Obama administration alleging that the way in which the White House implemented its health-care law violates the Constitution.

The lawsuit, filed in federal court in Washington, D.C. and drafted by George Washington University law professor Jonathan Turley, escalates a brewing battle between GOP lawmakers and the Obama administration over separation of powers. Here’s a quick overview of its legal arguments.

The lawsuit essentially makes two claims.

One concerns the White House’s decision to delay enforcement of a requirement under the Affordable Care Act that employers offer health coverage or pay a penalty.

The Treasury Department in February said employers with 50 to 99 full-time workers won’t have to comply with the mandate until 2016. Under the original 2010 health law, they had to offer coverage or pay a penalty beginning in 2014.

By delaying the mandate, the GOP argues, the Obama administration violated a procedural part of the Constitution (Article I, section 7, clause 2) known as the “presentment clause” that defines the legislative powers of Congress.

“The Constitution does not permit the Executive Branch to enact laws, or to amend or repeal duly enacted laws, including by adopting rules or taking other unilateral actions that have such an effect,” the lawsuit says.

The other focus of the lawsuit was less widely discussed by Republicans.

It deals with a component of the health law, known as an “offset program,” that authorizes the government to pay back insurance companies for the discounts they are required to offer low-income enrollees.

In January, CMS started paying health plans based on enrollment data submitted by insurers. (The transfers totaled about $4 billion in fiscal year 2014.) The House lawsuit alleges that while the offset program was authorized by the law, Congress never appropriated money to pay for it.

The money coming out of the Treasury, the complaint says, violates a section of the Constitution that gives Congress the power of the purse, one of the most important sources of leverage over the executive branch.

“No Money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of Appropriations made by Law,” states Article I, section 9, clause 7 of the Constitution.

The White House on Friday didn’t respond to the specific allegations made in the complaint but attacked the lawsuit as a frivolous distraction.

“Instead of passing legislation to help expand the middle class and grow the economy, Speaker Boehner and House Republicans are spending hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars pursuing a lawsuit that is without any sound legal basis,” White House spokeswoman Brandi Hoffine said.

As Law Blog has noted, the biggest obstacle for Mr. Boehner is getting a court to actually hear the complaint, involving a concept known as standing.