KNOXVILLE, Tenn. (AP) - A new operation opened in Knoxville on Sept. 21 offering Knoxvillians a new cool experience. The name is Ice Up Cryo, and it provides full-body cryotherapy sessions.

What is cryotherapy? Merriam-Webster Dictionary describes it as “the therapeutic use of cold.”

Partners in the business are Augustin Manolache, Lindsey Manolache, Dr. Jennifer Giltnane, and Evan Hauser and Casey Flowers, who are married and oversee the operation.

The couple describe this treatment as an option for those who routinely use ice to relieve or diminish pain.

“Cold therapy has been used for years with the use of ice packs or ice baths to produce an analgesic effect. This is just another method,” Hauser said.

The therapy was created to help ease the pain of those with rheumatoid arthritis. In Europe, many medical insurances cover the cost of the therapy. But its effects are more far-reaching than for arthritic issues. Cryotherapy has found its way into the training rooms of professional and collegiate athletic teams, including the Dallas Cowboys, the Dallas Mavericks and the Texas Rangers.

“When we first started doing our research on this there were none (full-body cryotherapy machines) in Tennessee. Now there is one in Memphis, Nashville and ours in Knoxville. The University of Alabama is making the process available to their athletes, and just recently the University of Georgia announced they have their own full-body cryotherapy system for their student athletes,” Hauser said.

So far the majority of Ice Up’s customers are fitness enthusiasts, and that is where they have focused their marketing.

Here’s how it works.

A customer is taken into a changing room and instructed to remove all clothing except for socks, house shoes and gloves, all of which are provided. Men are asked to wear boxer shorts or apparel will be provided as all extremities must be protected.

He or she will don a robe, which will be removed after entering the cylindric cryotherapy chamber. The platform on which the person stands will be mechanically lifted so that the person’s neck and head is above the chamber’s opening. Liquid nitrogen is released into the chamber, and the attendant on duty stands nearby during the procedure.

“You can see the vapors that flow over the machine. It’s kind of a mist and what it does is drop your skin temp to about 30 degrees Farenheit,” Hauser said, adding that the air itself drops to a negative 220 degrees Farenheit.

A first-time customer can stay in the chamber as long as 2 1/2 minutes. Following that the maximum time allowed is 3 minutes. When he exits the machine an infrared thermometer is used to determine skin temperature.

“That’s enough time to cool your skin temperature but not enough time to freeze any tissue. How this works is your brain will think that you are freezing so it pulls all the blood from your extremities into your vital organs. The vasoconstriction triggers your flight or fight response but when you get out of the machine the blood rushes back into your extremities and that blood is newly oxygenated and filled with all of the anti-inflammatory proteins which reduce inflammation,” Flowers said.

The health benefits include pain management and decrease of inflammation, which is important to elite athletes whose workout regimens are strenuous.

Hauser, an attorney by trade, cites numerous studies on the use of Cryotherapy, including a 2014 study done on the Polish National Kayak Team. The team used whole-body cryotherapy before and after workouts for the first 10 days of afirst 10 days of a 19-day training cycle. A determination was made that whole-body cryotherapy combined with exercise could extend exercise duration and intensity.

“We did a lot of research on this procedure, and it should be said that any of the statements that we make have not been evaluated by the FDA because they have elected not to evaluate it. It’s not a medical device. It’s not an invasive procedure. It’s just a rapid cooling of the skin temperature,” he said.

The owners have Casey Flowers to thank for the new venture.

“I heard it on the Mysterious University podcast and it was intriguing to me so I called my best friend who is a physician and we decided to take a road trip to Atlanta to try it out. She’s pretty good about debunking things. We did a session and immediately loved it. It gave us so much energy that we did it twice in one day,” she said.

She came back and told her husband and other friends about her experience.

“I said, ‘This is amazing. Come try this and tell me if I am crazy,’” she said.

A group got together, traveled to Atlanta and tried it for themselves.

“Right after it (the treatments) everyone was like ‘I want to do it again.’ It almost sounds like hocus-pocus when you sit here telling someone about it but when you get in and try it for yourself it’s like, ‘wow, this works.’ It’s just a matter of educating people because we are introducing Knoxville to this concept,” Hauser said.

Just as they opened their business they received a phone call from Kelsie Ahbe, a pole vaulter training in Knoxville for the 2016 Olympics. She was familiar with the treatment and was excited to find it available locally.

“There is a community of athletes on social media, and we follow each other and see what other people are doing. Some of my competitors have been using this type of technology in their recovery process. I looked to see if there was one in Knoxville, and it just so happened that it was just opening up,” Ahbe said.

The Ohio native lives in Knoxville while training with 2004 Olympic gold medalist Tim Mack and coach Jim Bemiller.

“I had my first session about three weeks after they opened, and I have done it two or three times since. I have tried it before and after training, and I tend to like it after training better, using it more like a recovery tool because after an intense session your body is inflamed. My training partner prefers to do it before a workout because a lot of endorphins are released when you do this,” she said.

“I feel better quicker, and I can recover quicker. As an athlete always looking for that edge, there are a lot of benefits for this. It helps me sleep better, increases my mood and energy level. Each person has to find out how much this therapy works for their own body but I think they will find it very effective,” she added.

Flowers, a mother of two, does at least one session a day and has found it has had a pronounced effect on her life.

“I am so much happier. I can go longer whereas before by 5 p.m. I was done with the day. Now I’m good to go until 8 or 9 p.m. I have more energy, and when I get up in the morning I no longer have those stiff aches and pains. I can jump right out of bed. I wouldn’t give it up,” she said.

In addition to the cryotherapy sessions the business is awaiting arrival of NormaTec recovery boots that many runners use.

“They are compression therapy boots that use air and pulse technology to squeeze and stimulate the blood flow through the legs following an intensive workout. Customers can come in and use those for 30- or 60-minute sessions or they can do both the therapy boots and the cryotherapy. They go hand in hand. The athletes call it the freeze and squeeze,” Hauser said.

While cost for the freeze and squeeze is yet to be determined, customers can take advantage of a number of cryotherapy packages, including the special Double Dip which allows customers to return within 72 hours of their introductory session for a second session and the limited-time offer of one session per day for 30 days.

___

Information from: Knoxville News Sentinel, http://www.knoxnews.com