Official diagnosis: The GOP presidential candidates are "a bunch of crybabies," Dr. Phil told Fox News.

The Zika virus and abortion rights: A new potential battle (Huffington Post)

And the "other" looming Zika threat. (CNN)

Despite the growing Zika threat, bringing back the banned pesticide DDT to combat the mosquito-borne virus is an "unviable solution," a columnist for The Daily Texan opined.

Meanwhile, Indonesian researchers are looking at a bacterial agent to infect mosquitoes that carry Zika and other pathogenic viruses. (Reuters)

A total of 12.7 million people enrolled in healthcare plans for 2016 through the Affordable Care Act's insurance exchanges, including more than 4 million new consumers, the Department of Health and Human Services reported.

Add two more deceased NFL stars to the CTE list: ex-Minnesota Viking Fred McNeill, who lost his family and a successful law career, and Hall of Fame nominee Ken "The Snake" Stabler. Both died last year. (CNN)

"The fault," United Healthcare, "is not in our stars but in ourselves." (Los Angeles Times)

Only at McDonald's: A "healthy" kale salad introduced in the fast-food chain's Canadian restaurants has more calories than a Big Mac, Time reported.

Shortly after concluding his nontestimony before a House committee, Martin Shkreli tweeted that panel members were "imbeciles." (Reuters)

How's that again? A federal appeals court rules that hospitals can call themselves "rural" for some purposes and "urban" for others. (Reuters)

The CDC set out to warn women about the hazards of drinking during pregnancy "but instead pretty much just blamed them for STDs and assault," according to Buzzfeed.

An MRI-compatible cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator from Medtronic is approved, the company said.

FDA reviewers gave high marks to a biosimilar version of infliximab (Remicade) in advance of an advisory committee meeting next week. (Reuters)

Proposed legislation to regulate use of public restrooms by transgender individuals has created a "bathroom panic" in Washington, The Daily Beast reported.

Immunity provided by a booster vaccine for whooping cough is short lived, according to CNN.

Utah is the latest state to grapple with proposed legislation to regulate use of medical marijuana, as described in the Salt Lake Tribune.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.