"Gentlemen, we have the technology, we have the capability to make the world's first billion dollar website. We can make it load slower, crash faster and email your personal information directly to Nigerian scammers."

"Using advanced space age technology, we can take years and years to put up a website that any normal company could have done by now for a fraction of the price."

"It's now the one billion dollar website. But just wait, it'll be the hundred-billion dollar website soon enough."

The Obama administration will spend over $1 billion on HealthCare.gov, the still-incomplete Obamacare website, by the end of the year, according to Obama nominee Sylvia Burwell’s testimony to Congress. “It is my understanding that as of February 28, 2014, CMS has obligated a total of approximately $834 million on Marketplace-related IT contracts and interagency agreements,” Burwell wrote to the HELP Committee. “These expenditures include the website and the systems that support enrollment through the Marketplace, such as the data services hub as well as other supporting IT infrastructure, including cloud computing, to support Marketplace IT development.” And that’s just through February. By the end of the year, HealthCare.gov spending is expected to rise to over $1 billion.

But don't worry. That's just part of the bill. Another $474 million has been spent on just four failed ObamaCare state exchanges.

Nearly half a billion dollars in federal money has been spent developing four state Obamacare exchanges that are now in shambles — and the final price tag for salvaging them may go sharply higher. Massachusetts’ dual-track approach could require more than $120 million on top of the $170 million it already has been awarded. That cost is nearly twice as much as if the state were to simply bail on its Connector, but officials seem to be banking in part on the Obama administration’s greater interest in helping the Massachusetts exchange — the once-pioneering model for Obamacare — survive.

The total amount? Think of North Korea's giant skyscraper hotel that has no purpose and keep multiplying. We're at $5 billion for the ObamaCare websites. And there's no sign of expenses slowing down. Just the opposite.

No one would have thought that Obama could end up blowing billions on non-working websites, but the bionic bigot has surprised us again. There's nothing he can't do.