While this may not sound like breaking news, many “well informed” sources of rumors have said otherwise. Consider it some wanting Westmoreland to show his had for his ’18 plans, or others who are seeking “their turn”, there are some that have an interest in an open seat for Georgia’s 3rd district. For any that are considering that as their next career move, they’re going to have to go through Lynn.

His statement is as follows:

“It has been an honor serving the Third District and I am forever grateful for the opportunity,” stated Westmoreland. “Joan and I are blessed to have had your support over the years, and we have made friends throughout the community that will last a lifetime. With that said, I would like to announce that I will be running for reelection in 2016 to continue being your conservative voice in Washington, D.C.

“Our nation is combating growing threats across the globe. Our national security is at the forefront of many American’s minds. We must do whatever it takes to protect our homeland and those who bravely defend it abroad.

“Serving as Chairman of the Subcommittee on NSA and Cybersecurity in the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence has given me a unique insight into what we are truly facing. I am proud of all we have accomplished in the intelligence community so far, but there is still work to be done. I would like to continue the momentum we have begun and make our nation a safer place for my grandchildren.

“The President’s liberal policies are not working. Healthcare premiums are rising because of ObamaCare, our foreign policy is a total failure, and we are giving in to the demands of countries like Iran.

“But a new chapter has begun in the House of Representatives. We are making meaningful reforms, and Speaker Ryan has allowed more amendments in the last few months than we have had in years. Your conservative voice is being heard. I will keep fighting to protect family values, keep our homeland safe and our military prepared. Together, we can put America back on a path to prosperity and create an opportunity economy for all.”

In addition to his Subcommittee Chairmanship on the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, Representative Westmoreland serves on the House Select Committee on Benghazi and the House Financial Services Committee.