The March 16 editorial “Remember the children” understated the harmful, even life-threatening, effects of the Hyde Amendment, which has a devastating effect on individuals, families and communities. By denying Medicaid coverage for abortion care, the Hyde Amendment, which disproportionately impacts women of color, imposes economic barriers on those struggling to get by and in need of safe, affordable reproductive health care. Women who seek abortions but are denied are three times more likely to fall into poverty than those who can get an abortion.

Protecting survivors of human trafficking and providing affordable abortion care are not mutually exclusive, but hijacking the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act to codify and expand the scope of Hyde does neither. When we are talking about the health and well-being of society’s most marginalized, we must get the facts straight. Politicians should not treat safe and affordable reproductive health care as a political bargaining chip in any legislation.

Jessica González-Rojas, Jackson Heights, N.Y.

The writer is executive director at the National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health.

●

In annual appropriations bills since 1976, Democrats routinely have united with Republicans in passing the Hyde Amendment, which simply prevents taxpayer monies from funding abortions except in cases of rape or incest or to save the life of the mother. Americans overwhelmingly oppose opening public coffers to the abortion industry.

Nevertheless, Democrats increasingly have been injecting abortion partisanship into human trafficking programs. Congressional hearings revealed how Obama administration officials denied a grant to a faith-based organization over abortion and other morally objectionable issues.

Many would note that abortion would only add to the trauma that human trafficking victims have already experienced. Yet even the Hyde Amendment does not disallow government-funded abortions in cases of rape, nor does it prevent abortions paid for with nongovernment funds. So protests over the Hyde Amendment in this trafficking-victims program are little more than partisan politics designed to enforce a radical abortion ideology.

Jonathan Imbody, Ashburn

The writer is vice president for government relations for the Christian Medical Association.