Latest findings have indicated that over 80% of psychiatrists within networks of a few of the biggest carriers in the Health Insurance Exchange Network in Washington, D.C. were either not approachable or don’t schedule fresh visit, indicating that the access to psychiatric health care is restricted.

While responding to complaints stating that patients have been failing to find accessible psychiatrists in their network, the American Psychiatric Association partnered with the APA Foundation to carry out a study of the three biggest health insurance plans in the Washington, D.C.’s health insurance exchange.

Researchers called a random sample of 150 psychiatrists who are publicly listed as network psychiatrists to check the proportion of psychiatrists who manage to schedule an appointment for a mental health outpatient visit and the days and time they take in scheduling an appointment.

When they tried all the network psychiatrists, 23% of phone numbers weren’t working or didn’t respond and never send any messages back over a week, whereas 51% of psychiatrists were working at the provided phone numbers, and 14% callers scheduled appointments.

They noted that the average wait time for a fresh outpatient appointment was roughly 21 days and just 7% psychiatrists managed to schedule a fresh outpatient appointment within 14 days.

As a whole, 86% of network psychiatrists weren’t approachable or failed to schedule a new outpatient mental health appointment.

In a press release, Saul Levin, MD, MPA, CEO and medical director of the APA, said that the study has shown that a number of people have failed to access required care and people have been spending for mental health care they can’t access.

Levin added, “The Affordable Care Act is intended to expand access to mental health and substance use disorder care, yet networks are shrinking both because psychiatrists are dropping out of the networks citing unreasonable administrative burden and low payment rates as reasons”. This is also because plans have been ‘narrowing their networks’ while offering robust directories of providers to lure buyers to the plan.