HANNITY: Welcome back to HANNITY. We're continuing our look at spring break in America. And one thing we found out is that beach communities all across the country, the onset of spring break, well, that means thousands of arrests, and many more than there used to. So instead of bringing them to jail one-by-one, in Bay County, Florida, they started bringing the jail to them. Portable holding cells and booking stations are set up during spring break just blocks away from the beach. Ainsley got a sneak peak, an up-close look. Take a look.

(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)

AINSLEY EARHARDT, FOX NEWS CORRESPONDENT: Are you OK? What are you in here for?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I just want to take a piss.

EARHARDT: Why were you arrested?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I don't know.

LT. DAVID BALDWIN, BAY COUNTY SHERIFF'S OFFICE: We are at the mobile booking center. The sheriff has tagged it as a welcome center. We use it for intake of all of our prisoners.

EARHARDT: And this is fairly new to spring break in this area, right?

BALDWIN: It is. Over the last two or three years we've slowly developed it over and over every year after debriefing on what --

EARHARDT: So tell us what it is.

BALDWIN: What we've done is brought in our mobile command center, brought in portable holding centers, and we're using this building to be able to book and process prisoners as they come in versus traveling at least 30 minutes to the jail, processing them there, and then 30 minutes back. You're saving a good hour, hour and a half drive time for a deputy and a prisoner.

EARHARDT: So we're really close to the strip. You can arrest people there and bring them here rather than driving 30 miles to go to the jail and then 30 miles back. That wastes an hour.

BALDWIN: Yes, ma'am.

EARHARDT: Once this is full, then you put them in this van?

BALDWIN: Yes. The prisoners will come from different divisions and put into our transport division and transferred to the jail. The first year we just had or command center in one cage, and then next year we added one more because we just saw that it was working that much better. And then this year we've implemented transport with the jail vans. We have an extra one. We have juvenile justice in the back that houses minors. Every year we learn something about the process for spring break.

EARHARDT: What are you in trouble for?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: I drank a beer and they caught me walking down the road.

EARHARDT: Open container?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes.

EARHARDT: Are you regretting that right now?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE: Yes, obviously. I'm shackled up like a convict. The first time I've ever been arrested in my whole life.

BALDWIN: When they come in, they will come straight through here. We have jail personnel that will take them inside and get booked all the way through to the point of ready for transport.

EARHARDT: Right. And what does that entail? They have to take their shoes off, pockets are emptied?

BALDWIN: Yes. They are searched and put into jail attire and then put into the central holding outside. Once that fills up, they go to the transport van and off to the jail they go.

(END VIDEOTAPE)

HANNITY: Here with reaction is "Imus in the Morning" producer Bernard McGuirk. Cardinal, How be thee?

BERNARD MCGUIRK, PRODUCER, "IMUS IN THE MONRING": I'm a little tired. I was down in Panama City myself. Good to be back.

(LAUGHTER)

HANNITY: That was you in the dog pen. Fox News senior correspondent Geraldo Rivera, and of course Ainsley broke this story. Ainsley, there's news reports that are saying, oh, the HANNITY show and Ainsley Earhardt have broken this big story. It's in their backyard. Don't they know what's going on?

EARHARDT: Panama City, the residents there, it's been all over their local newscasts. Sean Hannity comes to Panama City, sends his reporter. But this is happening in Palm Beach. This is happening Jersey Shore, Myrtle Beach, this is happening in California. This is happening all over the country, and that's the story. It's the youth of America. I don't want to say this is just happening in Panama City, it's not the community's fault. These kids are from all over.

HANNITY: We were all joking before we came on and Geraldo, I said to him, that looks like a dog pen almost.

EARHARDT: It does. It's a human dog pen. But they put them there to prevent them taking one kid two hours away, or an hour away --

HANNITY: And wasting time?

EARHARDT: Exactly. They are arrested. It's cold. They sit in there for an hour.

HANNITY: Come defend the human rights and sensibilities of drunks and druggies.

GERALDO RIVERA, FOX NEWS SENIOR CORRESPONDENT: They say that the 18th year is the most dangerous year in a boy's life because he gets his driver's license and goes out there. My son has had seven and eight accidents between them in that one year. The most dangerous year in a girl's life is that freshman year when she goes on spring break and she's not used to drinking. she does three, four drinks maybe max, and in college she's doing six, eight, ten a day in spring break. And what happens is, and Ainsley absolutely nailed it in her report with that young girl standing on that box and no bottoms on and people poking at her.

And so what has changed also is social media. It used to be that maybe you were unlucky and the "Girls Gone Wild" cameraman came around. It was very, very rare. So what happened in Panama City stayed in Panama City. Now with social media, it's everywhere.

HANNITY: What goes on in Panama City goes on all over the world.

RIVERA: It lasts forever.

MCGUIRK: First of all, I watched the whole series, and Ainsley looked like she was having too much of a good time.

(LAUGHTER)

EARHARDT: I will say this. I'm sorry to cut you off, but everyone said it looked like you -- were you instigating? No. It was the easiest story I've ever done because they were coming to me. They saw a camera.

HANNITY: We're on a tight timeframe here. We're going to go right back to you. And then Ainsley will respond. I kind of agree with Bernie. You were having too much fun. Guys, thanks much.

And coming up, much more with Ainsley, Geraldo, and Bernard. And then tonight --

(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Dear Mrs. Kelly, your family plan is no longer available under the Affordable Care Act. Dear Ms. Davis, we can no longer offer you the same policy.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

HANNITY: So are Democrats really going to run on Obamacare? Frank Luntz is here tonight with the latest dials. He's going to help answer that very question straight ahead.