And that’s exactly as Obama and the progressives want it. It is all by design. Cloward and Piven in action.

So as news cycles swing from one crisis to another, they accumulate. Unresolved and ever worsening.

We are in a rage about Ferguson. But while we focus on Ferguson, Iran gets ever closer to acquiring a nuclear weapon. If that happens, there will be no going back, and our world will be forever altered in unthinkable ways.

Meanwhile, ISIS now claims to have a dirty bomb. The Daily Mail reports:

Islamic State fanatics claim to have constructed a dirty bomb after stealing 40kg of uranium from an Iraqi university. (snip) In July nearly 40kg of uranium stored for scientific research went missing from Mosul University in northern Iraq. In a letter to the United Nations, Iraq's U.N. Ambassador Mohamed Ali Alhakim told Ban Ki-moon 'Terrorist groups have seized control of nuclear material at the sites that came out of the control of the state,' adding such materials 'can be used in manufacturing weapons of mass destruction.'

This is all in addition to Ebola, diseases brought here from Mexico and Central America, Obamacare destroying the health care system and our ability to access care, executive amnesty, gutting our military, emboldening jihadists, an education system morphing into re-education camps, a biased media that should be sued for malpractice, a persistently lawless president who rules like a monarch, the rising threat of Islamic terror, a stagnant economy, and on and on and on and on and on.

These offensive, illegal, and sometimes life-threatening events are hurled at us at breakneck speed. It leaves one breathless, not knowing where to turn or what to do. Jonah Goldberg captured this new reality in which we live brilliantly when he wrote in a recent NRO piece:

Like a cannibal in a coma ward, I have no idea where to begin. It is always remarkable to me — which is why I am remarking upon it — how the only way this president can be rescued from a bad news cycle is if an even worse one comes along. This is a source of frustration for many on the right who get outraged by the fact that “we” don’t talk enough about Fast & Furious or Benghazi or the IRS scandal or the VA scandal or Ukraine/Syria/Islamic State/China/Libya/Gitmo . . . . etc. The reason some of these topics get pushed to the backburner, even on the right, is that another controversy or scandal suddenly eclipses the previous one. If I ask you to hold a bowling ball and then, five minutes later, I surprise you by throwing a second bowling ball at you and shouting “Catch!” it’s sort of unfair for me to expect you not to drop the ball…. Phase One of Grubergate came to an end not because the White House or Jonathan Gruber or his legions of activist-journalist homunculi offered the necessary answers or contrition, but because a bigger mess came along. The current fight over Obama’s immigration diktat will probably end when the White House throws Israel under the Mother of All Buses by striking a deal with Iran (already Bibi Netanyahu must feel like Joe Pesci as he walked into the room with plastic sheets on the floor in Goodfellas). The subsequent controversy over that will likely subside when the administration reveals it has been running an illegal dogfighting ring in the White House basement. That brouhaha will conclude when Biden lets it slip that he routinely hunts human beings for sport on the grounds of the Vice President’s residence.

We are living in truly mad and perilous times. Now more than ever it is crucial that we stand together and fight these forces of evil with everything we have. There really is no other choice.

Hat tips: Weasel Zippers (dirty bomb story) and Ruthfully Yours (Jonah Goldberg’s article)