ACTUAL VEHICLE - Drayton is believed to be driving this burgundy 2004 Saturn Ion with South Carolina license plate EFV985. (Source: NCPD)

A murder warrant has been issued for 22-year-old Jamal Drayton of Summerville, according to North Charleston Police spokesman Spencer Pryor. (Source: CCDC)

North Charleston Police are searching for a man facing a murder charge in a restaurant parking lot shooting Friday night that left a 15-year-old dead.

A murder warrant has been issued for 22-year-old Jamal Drayton of Summerville, according to North Charleston Police spokesman Spencer Pryor.

Calvin Benekin, 22, was arrested and also charged with murder while three others, Deshone Rivers, Brittney Wall and Tyler White were charged with drug-related offenses in connection with the case, Pryor said.

Benekin received no bond for murder and will go to circuit court. He is being held on a $200,000 bond for possession of a firearm during the commission of a violent crime.

MOBILE USERS: Click here for photos from the scene.

Late Saturday, the Charleston County Coroner's Office identified the victim of the shooting at 15-year-old Derrick Roper.

Police responded to a reported shooting shortly after 6:30 p.m. Friday in the parking lot of the Olive Garden, located on the perimeter of Northwoods Mall. Police say they found Roper in a vehicle with a gunshot wound to the upper left shoulder. He was transported to an area hospital where he later died, Pryor said.

Investigators believe a drug deal was to take place Friday when the victim was shot.

"The scene had several pieces of marijuana scattered around a parking space with a large pool of blood," a responding officer wrote in his incident report. "There was also one spent shell casing, and one I've round in the same area."

Drayton is believed to be driving a burgundy 2004 Saturn Ion with South Carolina license plate EFV985.

Anyone who knows of Drayton's whereabouts or sees his vehicle is asked to call North Charleston Police at (843) 740-2800. Officials say to never attempt to apprehend a fugitive yourself.

Copyright 2016 WCSC. All rights reserved.