During the next decade, large employers in the United States are expecting increases in the cost of providing healthcare due to the Affordable Care Act. The result could be a more economical use of healthcare dollars, or the end of employer-sponsored healthcare.

A new study by the American Health Policy Institute finds that large employers in the United States expect overall Affordable Care Act-related cost increases of between $163 million and $200 million per employer during the next decade.

Employers currently spend $578.6 billion annually in providing health coverage for 170.9 million employees, retirees and dependents, according to the study.

“If the law leads to significant cost increases for them, this would affect the behavior of employers, which could in turn affect how—and even whether—they provide healthcare for their employees,” it states.

The study finds that over the next decade:

The Affordable Care Act will cost large U.S. employers between $4,800 to $5,900 per employee.

Large employers expect overall Affordable Care Act-related cost increases of between $163 million and $200 million per employer, or an increase of 4.3 percent in 2016 and 8.4 percent in 2023 over and above what they would otherwise be spending.

Based on these data, the total cost of the Affordable Care Act to all large U.S. employers will be from $151 billion to $186 billion, or 5.9 percent more than what they would otherwise be spending.

Large employers are responsible for a total of 137.7 million American jobs, and maintaining a healthy workforce continues to be a top priority for them, according to the AHPI.

According to the study’s authors, AHPI President Tevi Troy and Chief Economist Mark Wilson, “These data demonstrate that the added mandates, fees and regulatory burdens associated with the [Affordable Care Act] are increasing the cost of employer-sponsored healthcare plans, with implications for both employers and employees.”

Though the financial impact on individual companies will vary, most are feeling significant pressure to, “make fundamental changes to their health offerings as a result of the [Affordable Care Act.]”

According to Troy and Wilson, it is important for policymakers to see the same data employers are grappling with and understand how it may influence their future benefit and staffing decisions.