Hemet schools no longer limit the days substitute teachers work, a move they had made to avoid health insurance costs from new regulations that call for benefits for full-time employees.

An affordable health plan the district plans to offer substitute teachers next year and a delayed timeline for employers in the federal Affordable Care Act regulations prompted the decision, said Sharon Bowman, human resources director for Hemet Unified School District.

While Inland schools were trying to figure out how to comply with the new federal health care rules, Hemet in January started limiting individual substitute teachers’ hours to avoid paying them benefits. The district asked principals to try to use another substitute teacher instead of one who had already worked four days that week.

Large employers, such as almost every Inland school district, will face penalties if they don’t offer health insurance to full-time employees in 2015. The law, often called Obamacare, defines anyone who regularly works more than 30 hours a week or 130 hours a month as a full-time employee entitled to the employer's health insurance plan. However, the law asks employers to average each employee's hours over a period ranging from three to 12 months.

Most substitutes work seven hours a day, but a sub working five days a week, or 35 hours, might not be considered full-time because he or she doesn’t work that much every week. Substitute teachers’ pay varies by district but ranges from about $100 to $140 per day.

Inland school officials said they have no idea how many of their substitute teachers might be entitled to insurance benefits under the law and were reviewing pay records. Some, such as Riverside Unified, said they plan to offer insurance to their substitute teachers who work five days a week.

Bowman said Hemet district officials were considering when and if substitutes would work more than four days a week on a case-by-case basis.

“We were already giving a lot of exceptions,” Bowman said.

Most exceptions were for special education classrooms and schools in outlying areas. The sprawling district stretches to Idyllwild School to the east and Hamilton School in Anza to the southeast, Cottonwood Elementary School in Aguanga to the south and Winchester Elementary to the west.

Bowman said the decision to lift the limits was made Feb. 14, the Friday before schools went out for a weeklong break. Students returned to classes Monday, Feb. 24.

Contact Dayna Straehley at 951-368-9455 or dstraehley@pe.com