When the Visiting Nurse Association Health Group and Visiting Physician Services announced their merger last month, they were already linked by a common mission: bringing care into the homes of the seriously ill and the frail elderly, for whom it's often a major challenge to venture out into the community for medical care.

The leaders of the two organizations say they look forward to helping advance New Jersey further toward a national movement that seeks to keep patients healthy in their homes, rather than in hospitals and nursing homes.



Dr. Steven Landers is chief executive of VNA Health Group, the state’s largest not-for-profit provider of home health, hospice and palliative care; founded in 1912, VNA serves more than 112,000 patents a year. Visiting Physician Services, a medical practice founded in 1994 by Dr. Jon Salisbury, has five doctors, 21 nurse practitioners and four physician assistants who care for about 3,000 patients and make more than 30,000 house calls a year in northern and central New Jersey.



The two organizations already know one another well, Landers said.



“Over the years, we have very frequently shared patients,” he said. “We provide the nursing support and they provide the physician and nurse practitioner primary care component.”



The advantage of a formal merger, however, is:



“We can really start to improve care coordination for these patients,” Landers said. “We can have better information exchanges and outcomes tracking, and really function as a true in-home primary care team.”



And the combined organization is better positioned to participate in innovative programs now being launched by Medicare and commercial health insurers that seek both to improve the quality of care delivered, and rein in the rising cost.



Landers said that, nationwide, “There is a lot of positive momentum around models of team care that can help people to stay at home, potentially at a lower cost.”



Landers has experience with one of the leading innovative care models: Medicare’s Independence at Home program. Before joining VNA in June 2012, Landers was with the Cleveland Clinic, one of 17 health care organizations around the country selected by Medicare to participate in Independence at Home, launched in 2012 under the Affordable Care Act.



Medicare said Independence at Home uses home-based primary care teams designed to improve health outcomes and reduce expenditures for Medicare beneficiaries with multiple chronic conditions. The teams are directed by physicians and nurse practitioners, and Medicare will award incentive payments to health care providers who manage to reduce Medicare expenditures while meeting certain quality measures.



Medicare “is likely to expand the program, and we would like to participate,” Landers said.



Going forward, he said, managed care organizations, including Medicare Advantage plans and managed Medicaid plans, could embrace home-based care solutions.



“Where you truly have an interdisciplinary team, you can improve outcomes and lower costs, and that is what we want to be able to offer in New Jersey,” Landers said.



He said the findings from research and pilot programs suggest that, “With thoughtful in-home primary care, if you focus on the high-risk patients, such as the 5 percent most costly, most seriously ill older patients, you can save 20 percent, even potentially 30 percent overall. And the main way that you do that is you provide a lot of proactive support at home and avoid unnecessary hospitalization and nursing facilities.”



The key is to “have a team that is responsive and goes out to the home when problems arise. Usually, that’s a win-win: The patients and their families want to stay home if the medical conditions can be managed in an effective way,” Landers said.

Salisbury said combining with VNA will enable his team to serve more patients.



“Most of the patients that come to us were unaware that we existed until there was a need for us,” Salisbury said. “This will give us an opportunity to have much greater visibility, so people start to think about utilizing this new (home-based) delivery system. And maybe we will be able to spare them some of the hospitalizations that take place.”



Visiting Physician Services can provide in the patient’s home “pretty much anything that gets done in a traditional office,” Salisbury said, including X-rays, lab work and ultrasound. He said the group’s clinicians only see eight to 10 patients in a day, “so we get to spend much more time with each of our patients. So our patients, I think, are better educated. They understand their illness process, they know what makes it better and what makes it worse, and they understand the importance of taking their medication.”



Salisbury said he expects to add staff as demand for in-home services continues to grow, and aligning itself with VNA will help: “I think this is going to offer us greater ability to attract good quality people who want to work for a great organization” that is pursuing health care innovation.



He said Landers is a visionary, “and that is another reason for wanting to go forward” with the merger. “I’m excited more than I’ve been in 20 years: I think we’re going to really make some tremendous impact upon the way people view their ability to get health care.”



Landers said the combination of visiting nurses and visiting physicians “is an exciting first for our organizations, and we think it’s unique in New Jersey. We’re going to work to make an impact for these seriously ill patients that need help at home.”



Joel Cantor, director of the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy, said: “I agree that there are likely to be opportunities for a larger role for home visiting doctors. This is back to the future: We are experimenting with house calls again.”



He said the key difference this time around is that the modern approach “is specifically targeted at reducing risk of avoidable hospitalization, especially among patients with hard-to-manage chronic conditions such as diabetes and heart failure. Often, the patients who are the focus of home visits have multiple chronic conditions.”



Cantor said there are a number of possible business strategies to support home visiting. He said Medicare’s Independence at Home “is intended to improve care and reduce cost for patients at high risk of hospitalization.” Medicare has launched Accountable Care Organizations, including nearly a dozen in New Jersey, where hospitals and doctors work together to improve care and lower costs; health care providers are sharing the money that the ACO saves for Medicare



“If the ACOs see home visits as a way to reduce inpatient costs, they are likely to use them,” Cantor said. “Hospitals also face penalties if their 30-day readmission rates are high, so they might want to contract for targeted home visits.”



Cantor added: “With multiple possible funding sources for home visits by primary care doctors or nurses, the VNA and Visiting Physician strategy seems promising. Ultimately, we could all benefit if home visiting really does turn out that Medicare saves costs through reduced avoidable use of expensive hospital care.”

ALSO ON NJBIZ:

Source: Christie to keynote 2015 N.J. Chamber ‘Walk to Washington’ dinner

SJP Properties inks lease with e-commerce startup Jet.com at new Hoboken building

Millennial Minded blog: Ad agency puts its babies in a corner