For five straight years Idaho Business Review has shined a light on influential Idaho leaders. These are men and women who have helped shape the state, its economy, and its growth.

On May 19 at the Riverside Hotel, with more than 250 dignitaries, past honorees, friends, family, and coworkers looking on, eight CEOs were honored and each one was introduced by a video created by Peppershock Media depicting his or her story.

Chosen by their peers as best in class, these men and women are the 2015 honorees for CEO of Influence. Read their stories in the CEO of Influence magazine, which will be published with the May 22 Idaho Business Review – and see for yourself in these videos.

J. Thomas “Tommy” Ahlquist began his journey by collecting Boy Scout merit badges. Now, after a stint as ER doc, he is developing projects throughout the valley and, as he so eloquently puts it, is perhaps most celebrated as the man responsible for filling in “The Hole.”

John Cunningham set aside his career in accounting for the love of sports. He started on that path as “a glorified intern” for the Boise Hawks, made his way to general manager, and now oversees Block 22 LLC: The Grove, CenturyLink Arena and the Idaho Steelheads. He just might be the most humble CEO you will ever meet.

A doctor with a cause, Ted D. Epperly, M.D. went to Washington, D.C. to talk to Congress about the Affordable Care Act and met the president. He is equally passionate about the family care doctors at Family Care Residency of Idaho Inc. he helps get on their way to tend to those in Idaho who need them.

Jason Fry loves his job so much he commutes – and a long commute it is! It is 157 miles to Ketchum and the Wood River Community YMCA where he makes sure that kids in the community have a place to go to play sports and other activities – the same as he did in his old neighborhood where he grew up in Ohio.

Richard Johnson of Family Advocates strives to make families strong, and works tirelessly to erase the pain of child abuse and neglect. A living tribute to the work he does, he has welcomed seven boys, all originally from other families, into his own.

As a young teen, Albertsons’ Susan Morris buzzed around in the mountains of Colorado on a dirt bike – and also started on what would become her lifelong career with Albertsons. Did you know she had something to do with those chocolate chip cookies in the purple bag?

Boise’s downtown sure looks different from the way it did 27 years ago when Kâren Sander, fresh from South Africa, saw it for the first time. And, in the 11 years since taking the helm at the Downtown Boise Association, she has been one of the downtown’s biggest proponents.

And Bob Schwenkfelder, who never aspired to become a tire magnate but did, anyway, has also inspired fierce loyalty in his employees. He also makes sure his company, Commercial Tire, does well and pays well. His story, like the rest, is one of overcoming challenges, and of creating opportunities and then seizing them.

View more photos from the event here