Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

COLUMBUS, Ohio (AP) — After leading Ohio State to a national championship, Joey Bosa had one question for the 45,000 fans who crowded into Ohio Stadium in late January.

“How are you guys out here right now? It’s freezing,” he said from a makeshift stage erected on the south end of the field.

Buckeyes fans were on their feet as coach Urban Meyer and the team emerged from the southeast tunnel obscured by fog and flanked by flames. Onstage, local politicians delivered speeches and players danced and joked with each other while chants of “O-H! I-O!” rang out throughout the stadium and several highlight videos from the Buckeyes’ 14-1 season played on the scoreboard.

As he took the podium to address the crowd, coach Urban Meyer said he initially wanted to move the event indoors to Value City Area until athletic director Gene Smith challenged him.

“Gene Smith says, ‘You don’t realize, these Buckeye fans are nuts,'” Meyer said. “You are nuts, and from the bottom of our heart thank you for being here.”

The university awarded 2,500 free passes allowing fans to watch from the field. More than an hour before the event got underway, they lined a barrier on the 45-yard line as children did somersaults and threw footballs in the north end zone and Brutus Buckeye high-fived those at the front.

Associated Press regional director Eva Parziale presented the AP national championship trophy to Meyer, who also accepted championship trophies from the College Football Playoff and the American Football Coaches Association. Flames and fireworks went off as Meyer gathered in the first college football playoff trophy.

After recognizing walk-on cornerback Nik Sarac for selflessly declining a scholarship during the summer, Meyer brought out a handful of players including quarterbacks Braxton Miller, J.T. Barrett and Cardale Jones, whom he introduced as “the magnificent three.” Miller, whose status for next season is unknown, told fans, “We’ve got another year to do it, so let’s go Bucks.”