Living with a Disability magazine features well-researched and easy-to-read content crafted by experienced disability lawyers, health care professionals, and other noted experts. This Affordable Care Act program is particularly important to our community of readers who have disabilities, but who may not have previously qualified for insurance.

The Editorial Board of Living with a Disability magazine is urging all eligible and uninsured people with a disability who haven’t already signed-up for a health plan via the Federal Government’s health marketplace HealthCare.gov, to ensure that they do so by February 15, 2015 in order to avoid missing the 2015 enrollment deadline.

“This Affordable Care Act program is particularly important to our community of readers who have disabilities, but who may not have previously qualified for insurance,” commented Living with a Disability magazine’s associate publisher Joshua C. Eyestone. “Now there is a possibility that they will get the coverage the need and are entitled to, so they can live their life to its fullest.”

While the roll-out of HealthCare.gov was beset with high-profile technological problems, those problems appear to be resolved.

"Our primary goal in all of this is to be as fair, efficient and flexible as possible," commented Kevin Counihan, the CEO HealthCare.gov, which between November 15 and December 12, 2014 helped 2.5 million people select a health plan. According to the Congressional Budget Office, it’s expected that by the end of the year, 9 million people will enroll in a health plan through the website, or about 2.3 million more than at the current time.

Added Mr. Eyestone: “We know that what is commonly referred to as Obamacare has triggered a lot of political discussion and very heated debate. However, regardless of what side of the political spectrum people fall on, we cannot afford to lose sight of what really matters, which is ensuring that the vulnerable in our society are appropriately insured so that their illness or disability doesn’t become debilitating. Taking care of our neighbours is an American value that ties us all together, and it’s the spirit that we rely on to publish Living with a Disability Magazine.”

Readers who visit Living with a Disability Magazine’s website will find a wide range of other helpful articles related to a variety of healthy living tips that are valuable to both disabled and able-bodied individuals. All content is available at no cost, and no membership or subscription is required.

For additional information, media interview requests and advertiser inquiries, contact Editor(at)FreeDisabilityMagazine(dot)com.

About Living with a Disability

Living with a Disability is full-color print and online magazine that help individuals with various disabling medical conditions live life to the fullest. The print version is available on publication racks in doctor’s offices, health clinics, hospitals, pharmacies, community service agencies, grocery stores, convenience stores and other locations. Those who are unable to pick up a copy of Living with a Disability are invited to email Editor(at)FreeDisabilityMagazine(dot)com to sign up for a no-cost subscription, which will be sent directly to their home. They can also visit http://www.FreeDisabilityMagazine.com to access hundreds of helpful articles.