Our country was built on a vision that anyone who works hard will have access to a decent life. Nothing too extravagant, but at least a safe place to sleep at night and enough money to put food on the table.

That vision never included the unfair realities confronting low-wage workers today: Moms who – because they miss a day at work to care for a sick child – can’t make up the lost income for rent; drive through attendants who can’t afford to eat the Big Macs they serve; workers who string together multiple jobs just to avoid homelessness.

These realities are the heartbeat of the national movement to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour. They’re why workers whose incomes are desperately below the poverty line have been willing to stand together publicly and risk the meager income they earn to advocate for $15 an hour pay and the right to form a union.

Not only is the current minimum wage not enough for a family in Orange County – where rent for even the most reasonable two-bedroom apartments would require workers to earn more than $30/hour working full time – but wage theft is rampant among low-wage industries, further eroding low-wage worker security. Workers are forced to work off the clock or aren’t paid overtime, for example, and have very little hope of ever recovering their stolen money.

That’s not fair.

Meanwhile, corporations that are leading the charge to fight against any increases to the minimum wage exploit the system – and their workers – to increase profits at taxpayer expense.

For example, employers such as Wal-Mart often limit workers to 28 hours a week – just few enough hours so they won’t have to pay for health care as required in the Affordable Care Act, because those workers are still so poor they qualify for taxpayer funded public assistance instead.

With low wage jobs being the fastest growing jobs in the U.S., we can’t afford to ignore these issues any longer.

In the fast food industry alone, more than half of workers rely on public assistance to cover basic needs, such as food, rent or health care, costing taxpayers some $7 billion annually, according to a recent UC Berkeley Center for Labor Research and Education study.

Americans who can work and who do work should not earn so little that they face homelessness.

Raising the minimum wage is a significant part of the solution.

There is broad agreement among economists that raising the minimum wage reduces income inequality by pushing up the wage floor relative to the median wage, growing prosperity and community from the middle out instead of from the top down. That played out in Seattle, which recently raised its minimum wage to $15 an hour. Despite cries from business lobbyists that jobs would be lost and costs would go up, those warnings haven’t materialized because they ignored a fundamental law of capitalism – that when workers have more money, businesses have more customers.

Far too much of this debate has centered around those scare tactics, when the answers are so much more simple. Do we want to participate in a society where families who want to work – and who do work hard – still can’t get by? Or do we want to provide a better future for our children and for our families, and to prevent some corporate interests from stealing our American Dream?

Jennifer Muir is general manager, Orange County Employees

Association.