Rep. Sabi Kumar (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights The poorest in our society, those with incomes below 138 percent of federal poverty level, are not covered.

Low-level plans fail to cover most medical needs, and deductibles and co-pays can be high.

Electronic health records emphasize data collection over efficiency or patient care.

In 2008, presidential candidate Barack Obama promised, “If you don’t have health insurance, you’re going to be able to buy the same kind of insurance that Sen. McCain and I enjoy as federal employees. Because there’s a huge pool, we can drop the costs.” Considering the Democratic majority in Congress at the time, the promise was deliverable. Instead, we have a failed law and many problems.

The individual mandate requires all to have health insurance or pay a penalty. For a young invincible, insurance costs thousands more than the penalty. We know that people should have insurance. We also know that broccoli is good for us. Can the government make us eat broccoli? The employer mandate requires employers with more than 50 full-time employees to offer health insurance for those working over 30 hours a week. Many employees have been cut to work 29 hours! Although underemployed, they are statistically considered employed. Gov. Phil Bredesen showed that it is cheaper for an employer to pay penalties than to provide health insurance. Of the 40 million uninsured, approximately 12 million Americans signed up for Obamacare in 2015, only to discover that most of their medical needs are not covered. Deductibles and co-pays can be 10-25 percent of a family’s yearly income. Under threat of penalty, they are being forced to buy catastrophic insurance. Subsidies for out-of-pocket expenses are not available to those who can only afford a Bronze plan. Considering the purpose of a subsidy is to help the needy, this is reverse logic. The poorest in our society, those with incomes below 138 percent of federal poverty level, are not covered. They are left to the circumstances of their state budgets and governments. Yet, federal subsidies cover families with incomes up to $94,400. These subsidies are not scaled, but jump from one level to the next. If a family earns $100 more in a particular period, a move to the next bracket can cost them $3,000 in lost subsidies. This is a disincentive to those who are inclined to work hard and improve their income! Electronic health records are a major boondoggle. The promise was of efficiency and lower costs. Instead, a video screen has been inserted between the doctor and patient, limiting communication. Various software systems available do not communicate with each other. Software costs are $63,750 per physician and millions for each hospital, plus yearly fees. Federal subsidies for these purchases assure a higher expense. User dissatisfaction is at 70 percent. The emphasis is on data collection and not efficiency, nor patient care. The CMS Innovation Center is tasked with devising “innovative payment and service delivery methods.” So far, 26 methods are being developed, at a cost of $10 billion!

Although insurance is no longer denied because of pre-existing conditions and lifelong medical expenses are no longer capped at $1 million, Obamacare has failed to provide Americans with insurance like the insurance for President Obama and Sen. McCain.

Medical illness is a threat to our lives. Insurance hassles add stress and impair recovery. As a physician and a state representative, I say Obamacare has failed to provide a solution for America’s health-care needs.

Sabi "Doc" Kumar, M.D., is a surgeon and state representative from District 66, Robertson County.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1TsIksf