MANCHESTER

New Hampshire

Donald Trump

The ballroom at the Executive Court Banquet Facility here -- sandwiched between a steakhouse and a Best Western Plus hotel -- was packed with a few hundred campaign volunteers and ardent supporters.

Reporters from around the world were crammed in the back so tight in the back that overflow tables were hastily set up in the lobby.

The gathering at times had the feel of being among a group of boosters for a beloved college football team on a winning streak. There was lots of chanting-- "Trump! Trump! Trump!" and " USA ! USA ! USA !" -- waving of oversized foam fingers in addition to Trump's "Make America Great Again" campaign placards.

There was a sense of bewilderment in the eyes of some Trump campaign staffers, the foot soldiers who helped a man who had never run for political office before could top a field of experienced governors (including one named Bush) and senators to win the first-in-the-nation primary. Trump campaign officials compared notes on the demographic breakdown of the voting results in New Hampshire with TV news producers, in a sign of the how Trump's campaign infrastructure is still in the formative stages.

CNN was the network of choice for election results at the gathering for most of the night, although the channel switched to Fox News after 8 p.m. ET when the polls officially closed. Scattered boos could be heard when Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly appeared on screen, in a nod to Trump's unrestrained criticism of the Kelly.

The boos were much louder during the telecast of Hillary Clinton's concession speech, after the Democratic front-runner came in second to her ultra-liberal rival, Bernie Sanders . "Bo-ring" a group of men chanted for the benefit of the TV cameras when Clinton railed against the influence of Big Money in politics, a subject that Trump has also taken on in his self-financed campaign.

There were boos for Clinton's passing references to President Obama and the Affordable Care Act. There were boos when the camera panned to Bill Clinton and Chelsea Clinton .

The Trump crowd mostly ignored the speech that followed by Sanders, except when it went on too long, delaying Trump's turn at the microphone. "Shut Up Bernie," they chanted briefly at line point.

Finally, Trump's turn came. His remarks were subdued by his own standard. He didn't break new ground with zingers or "OMG" moments. He started his remarks by extended heartfelt thank-yous to his family and children and his parents, Fred and Mary, and he saluted his siblings including his late brother, Fred. He congratulated his opponents for running a strong race, in his own unique way ("now that I got that over with").

His 15-minute speech didn't veer much from his standard campaign-trail promises. He vowed to build a wall along the nation's border with Mexico to keep illegal immigrants and drugs from flowing into the country. He vowed to repeal and replace Obamacare with a better system. He promised that on his watch, America would "beat" China , Japan and Mexico at trade deals that allow those countries "to take so much of our money away from us on a daily basis." He closed by predicting he will win the Feb. 20 Republican primary in South Carolina .

The message that Trump is not beholden to any special interests because he has self-financed his campaign to date has surely resonated with his supporters.

John Caputo ,, of Ossipee, N.H. , has been a fan of Trump's since he watched him build the Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City in the 1980s.

"We all know he's great in business," Caputo said. "He can't be bought by anyone because he's already got more money than anyone who is trying to buy him."

Caputo was red-faced and sweating as he spoke because he'd been energetically waving a bright red "Trump 2016" scarf in front of the bank of TV cameras at the party. He's been active in politics for years (he volunteered that he voted for Bill Clinton in 1993) but never with the same enthusiasm that he feels for Trump. In Caputo's view, his track record in business means that Trump can back up audacious boats such as the promise he made to the victory party crowd: "I will be the greatest jobs President that God ever created."

Alan Fairfield , 17, of Amherst N.H. , said he's glad to see his candidate "really taking off" in New Hampshire . "People didn't take him seriously before" but they will now. Fairfield was proud and gratified after starting his day at 5 a.m. ET volunteering for Trump's get-out-the-vote effort.

Other young voters were enjoying the moment for the candidate they've embraced. Outside the Executive Court just as the party broke up, a twenty-something oman in an oversized fishing sweater and jeans ran down the sidewalk toward her gaggle of friends, with a Bud Lite in a can in hand. She looked for all world like she was feeling pretty great about America.

© 2016 Variety Media, LLC, a subsidiary of Penske Business Media; Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC