As technology continues to advance, new radio frequency identification device chips are being used and even implanted inside of people to make life easier. However, some biblical end-time believers have warned against the technology and claimed this chip could be the beginning of the implementation of the Mark of the Beast, which is spoken of in the book of Revelation.

Technology is constantly evolving to impress the consumer with the new coolest capabilities available. People now use their phones to monitor their weight, their bank accounts, locations, and more; but many have ignored the fact that these very devices are also diminishing their rights to freedom and privacy.

People are now considering the RFID chip for a number of different reasons such as: to track lost children or people suffering from Alzheimer's, pull up medical records, locate people or in the governments case, they said to "identify terrorists," and some even for things as simple as turning on lights or opening doors, just to name a few.

A very popular form of the RFID chip is now being implanted inside of hundreds of Americans as well as many throughout the world. It is called, Verachip, and has been re-branded as PositiveID. The chip was founded by Scott Silverman and was FDA-approved as a human-implantable microchip in 2004.

Below are a number of things that now include RFID chips:

EZ-Pass, Chase "Freedom" & Citibank "Simplicity" Cards, U.S. Passports, State Enhanced Driver Licenses, NFC Enabled "Smart Phones" with RFID Sim Cards (iPhones, Samsung Galaxy...etc), Military I.D.'s, Gas Station RFID Key Tags, Work/Job/School Entrance I.D Cards, GPS Devices, animals, and now some humans.

A number of biblical end-time theorists and believers on social media have been outspoken against the new technology, with some even strongly feeling the chip is associated with the 666 mark spoken of in Revelation. The scripture concerning the Mark of the Beast states that people will not be able to buy or sell without the mark, leading some to relate the Bible verses to the touted technology. They have warned Christians not to take the mark, although various other believers have been more skeptical about the claims.

Below are a number of videos showing what people are using these RFID Chips for.

IBM Commercial, promotes the RFID micro chip for shopping. [Video Has since been deleted]

Walmart introduces Obamacare RFID Chip Machine. [Video Has since been deleted]

NBC News says "all Citizens Will Soon Have RFID Chip Implants." [Video Has since been deleted]

The United States has unveiled a national I.D. plan below is the video



The chip is now being used as a Medical implant.



RFID is also being utilized to tracking Kids.



Airport pre-screening has been introduced in which the chips in your passports are read.



People are even using the chip to help with weight loss.



An older video on NBC News shows that even the Vatican enabled the RFID chip, agreed upon by the former Pope.



"And he causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: And that no man might buy or sell, except he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six."

Revelation 13:16-18

Do you think RFID chip is innovative, invasive, or a sign of the times? Leave your comments below.