The comeback of the wild turkey in Colorado has been well documented by now. The return, well, that’s another story.

Indeed, the proliferation of wild turkeys nationwide is among the most successful wildlife restoration stories in the history of North America. And here in Colorado, the birds have never been more plentiful, measured at more than 35,000.

But that doesn’t necessarily mean turkeys are easy prey. As hunters making their way into the woods for the spring season that began just before sunrise Saturday will attest, wild gobblers can seemingly vanish in an instant.

The fortunate few who drew limited licenses this spring will generally look to the Eastern Plains, where habits of the Rio Grande subspecies are easily patterned — returning to roost in the same trees most nights, feeding in the same fields by day. There’s a reason they are in the minority.

Everyone else — some 15,000 hunters in the forest and field before the season ends May 24 — will be doing it the hard way, tracking the more elusive Merriam’s turkey that inhabit about 19,000 square miles of rugged terrain statewide. Consider it a blessing and a curse.

“These birds (Merriam’s) are movers,” said veteran turkey hunter C.J. Kausel of Green Valley Ranch. “They’re like mule deer. They move around.”

The blessing is the widespread prevalence of turkeys. But with so much space to roam, it’s a wonder hunters ever find the birds.

So where is an overwhelmed turkey hunter to turn?

The smart money says south. Then west. Statistically speaking, the top producing counties for spring turkeys in Colorado are Archuleta, Mesa, Garfield, Delta, Las Animas, Pueblo, La Plata, Teller, Huerfano and Montrose, more or less in that order. (Yuma actually ties Archuleta, but for Rio Grande turkeys, not Merriam’s.)

“We may have the best turkey hunting in the state. The mix of ponderosa pine and Gambel oak is the habitat turkeys like,” said Patt Dorsey of Durango, southwest region manager for Colorado Parks and Wildlife. “We saw tons of wild turkeys this winter. If those big flocks carried over to spring, turkey hunting should be excellent.”

There’s little reason to believe Colorado’s southwestern turkey populations would dwindle in the face of such a mild spring. Snowpack in the Four Corners region of the state has already diminished to less than 50 percent of average, offering prime forage and triggering spring mating activity. Similar conditions exist along the New Mexico border to the east, offering strong potential for a promising spring hunt.

“The report from the property we hunt south of Walsenburg said there were 100 turkeys in the front yard last week,” Kausel said. “There’s more this year than last year and the weather has been cooperative, so it should be pretty good.”

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby @denverpost.com or twitter.com/ swilloughby