John Elwood, attorney for Anthony Elonis, speaks to reporters Monday outside the Supreme Court in Washington, D.C. Susan Walsh/AP

“How do you start out if you want to be a rap artist?” Chief Justice John Roberts pondered Monday during oral arguments in Elonis v. U.S., a Supreme Court case about whether proof of intent is necessary for federal threat convictions.

Roberts joined several colleagues appearing sympathetic to arguments from Pennsylvania man Anthony Elonis, released in February after more than three years behind bars for posting purported rap lyrics containing violent language on Facebook.

Elonis says he did not intend to threaten his estranged wife, an FBI agent, schoolchildren and police with his posts, and that proof of intent should be required for conviction.

He was found guilty under a lower standard: that a reasonable person would interpret his words as threats. Federal appeals courts are divided on the proper standard for a threat conviction, and state court systems also have different standards.

[RELATED: Digital Rights, Rap Lyrics and More at Stake in Elonis Case]

Domestic violence survivor groups, 18 state attorneys general and the Department of Justice have lined up against Elonis, saying his victory could imperil victims and give their abusers a free pass to creatively threaten them.

Justices, however, seemed concerned Monday about how the case's outcome might affect the speech rights of a large number of Americans.

Roberts asked Deputy Solicitor General Michael Dreeben how any budding rap musician might fare if his initial song lyrics were taken at face value, and whether a reasonable person can be expected to be familiar with the style of rap music.

Established rapper Eminem, Roberts noted, fills songs with violent language, at times targeting specific people with impunity.

[ALSO: Read the Lyrics to Some of Elonis' Songs]

Dreeben said "the speaker chooses their audience" and argued the well-known rapper performs for entertainment value, whereas Elonis’ words were written “in the guise” of lyrics – a point Elonis’ attorney, John Elwood, said is discredited by the existence of older posts.

Roberts wasn’t just concerned with the early careers of rappers. He also worried that more popular teenage Facebook users may face a different standard for threat convictions than teens with few friends, as the size of the audience might skew a reader's reaction.

Justices Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor, two of the three women on the court, also voiced concern about the case's First Amendment implications.

Kagan, noting conviction for many crimes requires proof of intent, pushed back on the government’s insistence that recklessness can make someone guilty. That is “not the standard we typically use with the First Amendment,” she said. “We don’t want to chill innocent behavior.”

Sotomayor added, “We’ve been loathe to create more exceptions to the First Amendment.”

Justice Antonin Scalia suggested that not having a requirement of intent could make a person informing Elonis’ then-wife of Facebook threats criminally liable. Dreeben said that wasn’t true.

Some justices did appear skeptical of requiring proof of intent, however.

“How does one prove what’s in someone else’s mind?” asked Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, a point she later repeated.

Echoing the concerns of anti-domestic violence groups, Justice Samuel Alito said that describing apparent threats as lyrics, if allowable, “sounds like a road map for threatening a spouse.”