“Return to Homs,” a documentary following the transformation of soccer star Abdul Basset al-Saroot from nonviolent protester to armed rebel in Syria’s civil war, is the first film in the inaugural Milwaukee Muslim Film Festival, starting Feb. 26, 2015. Credit: Proaction Film/Ventana Films

By of the

One of the nation's few Muslim film festivals will kick off in Milwaukee on Thursday with "Return to Homs," an award-winning documentary made on the front lines of Syria's civil war.

"Homs" is the first of five films that will be featured during the inaugural Milwaukee Muslim Film Festival, which runs through April 23. The films chosen for this first festival explore the lives and histories of Muslims around the world, offering a mix of heartache, hope and humor.

"We didn't want to just bring fluff," said Janan Najeeb, president of the Milwaukee Muslim Women's Coalition, which viewed dozens of films over the last year as it organized the festival. "We wanted people to know about the issues going on and to have an opportunity to discuss them."

The festival is being sponsored in part by the Greater Milwaukee Foundation's Mary L. Nohl and William D. Vogel funds. Each of the films will include a talk-back after the screenings.

Admission to movies in the festival is $6, with free admission for University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee students at the screenings at UWM Union Theatre, 2200 E. Kenwood Blvd.

Here's what's showing:

■"Return to Homs," which won the World Cinema Grand Jury Prize for documentaries at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival, follows the transformation of soccer star Abdul Basset al-Saroot from nonviolent protester to armed rebel in the war to unseat Syria's Bashar al-Assad. Showing at 7 p.m. Thursday at UWM Union Theatre and at 5:30 p.m. March 1 at the Milwaukee Art Museum's Lubar Auditorium, 700 N. Art Museum Drive.

■"Yemeniettes": Follows a group of teen girls in Yemen who start a small business — in a country where women have little education and few opportunities — and enter it into an entrepreneurship competition. Showing at 7 p.m. March 11 at Oriental Theatre, 2230 N. Farwell Ave., and at 7 p.m. March 12 at UWM Union Theatre.

■"Abd El Kader": This docudrama, partly animated, tells the story of the 19th-century Algerian Sufi scholar and military leader who led the fight against French colonialism. His exploits and compassion, particularly toward Christians, were heralded around the world — including in the United States, where the small Iowa town of Elkader is named for him. Showing at 7 p.m. March 24 at Oriental Theatre.

■"Giraffada": Based on a true story, it follows a veterinarian-father and son who, with the help of an Israeli vet, smuggle a giraffe from an Israeli zoo to another in the West Bank. Showing at 7 p.m. April 2 at UWM Union Theatre and at 7 p.m. April 8 at Oriental Theatre.

■"The Wanted 18": Also based on a true story, this award-winning documentary uses claymation and interviews to tell the absurd tale of a Palestinian village forced to hide its cows — bought so the villagers could boycott Israeli milk during the first Intifada — from the Israeli Army, which had declared them a security risk. Showing at 7 p.m. April 15 at Oriental Theatre and at 7 p.m. April 23 at UWM Union Theatre.

For more information, go to the festival's website: mmfilmfest.com.