Topics: Billy Bragg, Bingo Hand Job, eddie vedder, Johnny Marr, Matthew Sweet, Michael Stipe, mike mills, Mitch Easter, Modest Mouse, Music, Patti Smith, Peter Buck, R.E.M., Robyn Hitchcock, Roger McGuinn, smiths, thom yorke, thurston moore, Video, Entertainment News

Unlike many bands, R.E.M. never shied away from having guests perform on their songs, either live or on record. These collaborations produced some of the group’s most indelible moments — from B-52s member Kate Pierson’s brassy hollers on “Shiny Happy People” and keening harmonies lacing through “Me In Honey” and Patti Smith adding ghostly, longing gravitas to “E-Bow the Letter” to Peaches spicing up “Alligator Aviator Autopilot Antimatter” with bratty punk charm and KRS-One adding funky hip-hop flair to “Radio Song.”

But in addition to these notable appearances, R.E.M. has teamed up with plenty more high-profile names. Some of these performances happened spontaneously during concerts; some were deliberate studio or TV collaborations; and still others were happy accidents. Here are 10 of R.E.M.’s most overlooked (or little-known) collaborations and collaborators.

The Byrds’ Roger McGuinn

In June 1984, legendary Byrds guitarist and Rickenbacker enthusiast Roger McGuinn joined R.E.M. onstage in New Jersey to perform a pair of songs (including “So You Want to Be a Rock ‘n’ Roll Star” and Them’s “Gloria”) for an MTV special, “Rock Influences: Folk Rock.” McGuinn would join the band at a 1985 Florida show as well.

The Lovin’ Spoonful’s John Sebastian



Not only did high-quality video of McGuinn’s New Jersey appearance surface in recent years — so did pristine video taken at the same show featuring R.E.M.’s run-through of the Lovin’ Spoonful’s “Do You Believe In Magic?” with the song’s writer, John Sebastian.

Johnny Marr

R.E.M.’s last major North American tour featured Modest Mouse as one of the opening acts. At the time, that band featured Smiths guitarist Johnny Marr as a sideman. Naturally, the ever-affable Marr hopped onstage several times with R.E.M. to add some extra chime to “Fall On Me.”

Los Lobos’ Steve Berlin

When it came time to add saxophone to songs, the members of R.E.M. were judicious not only about how often they used the instrument — but who played the part. For the “Document” tune “Firehouse,” the job went to Steve Berlin, a saxophonist known for his work with the Blasters and Los Lobos. Unlike many ’80s sax lines, Berlin’s contribution still sounds fresh and vital today.

Billy Bragg & Robyn Hitchcock