Buy Photo File photo. Andrea Mazoli talks to students in 2013 during a class at the Oak Street School in Lakewood. (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

Four Ocean County school districts that say they are underfunded by the state Department of Education will have their lawsuit heard next week in a Mercer County courtroom.

The districts — Lakewood, Lakehurst, Ocean Township and Little Egg Harbor — are suing alongside 12 other New Jersey school districts for more state funding through the Department of Education. They say more state money is needed to provide their students — which are on average poorer than those in the rest of the state — with a "thorough and efficient" education required under the state constitution, according to a news release from the Education Law Center.

Howell to redistrict schools in 2015

The case, known as the "Bacon" lawsuit, began in 2006 after the state Board of Education ruled these schools' funding was inadequate and violated the state constitution. After delays from an appeal and subsequent court proceedings, the schools received increased state financial support in 2009, according to the Education Law Center.

That victory for the districts was short-lived. State budget cuts in the 2010-11 school year eliminated those increases to the 16 districts, according to the Education Law Center.

12 community colleges to share $15M in funding

The Education Law Center, which is representing the "Bacon" districts in court, said the state should provide more money to these poor school districts for K-12 education and universal preschool for their 3- and 4-year-old children.

The Law Center plans to ask Superior Court Judge Mary Jacobson to order state Acting Education Commissioner David Hespe to provide an additional $18.5 million in funding for education and preschool in these districts. Arguments in the case will begin in state Superior Court in Mercer County on Dec. 11.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1rOo3TK