Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump (Photo: Mark Zaleski / AP) Story Highlights Americans are angry over the decay of their country.

Trump is a master marketer who plays to our fears and anger.

Anger, in the long run, usually accomplishes very little.

As a principled, evangelical Christian pastor, I am not excited about Donald Trump’s presidential run or the political tone of either party (you could insert Bernie Sanders' name here as well). Trump seems to be a petulant, immature teenager disguised as a self-made billionaire. I do know why he’s doing so well, however. In the aftermath of the Super Tuesday massacre of his fellow Republicans, Trump continues to do well because of two issues: anger and fear. And I get both.

People are angry. Angry because of America’s demise and disintegration both at home and abroad; angry because of moral chaos; angry because of a sluggish economy; angry because minority groups are continually allowed to silence the voice of the great majorities; angry because of political lies on the part of our elected officials; angry because of the disconnect between D.C. and the rest of America; angry because the media and political elites rarely meet or remotely understand the concerns of the average American.

Who among us hasn’t fumed and fussed at our kitchen table with friends and family members over the decay of an exceptional America? We’re angry enough to say, “I want someone to go to D.C. and take names, kick butt and keep their word." Many in America are so angry that they are willing to let their anger eclipse their reason. And Trump fits this narrative.

Further, Trump knows people are afraid. Afraid of open borders and the impact of illegal immigration on the job market and our social services infrastructure; afraid of our current, feckless policies toward radical Islam; afraid of a future without a moral and political rudder; afraid that our culture is disintegrating into a cauldron of chaos; afraid to call evil what it is; and afraid that our future is limited and bleak.

And who isn't angry and afraid? Liberals and progressives are angry at the development of an oligarchy of new ruling-class elites, the Wall Street 1 percenters. Conservatives are angry because no one seems to care about personal freedom, freedom of speech, religious liberty, personal accountability and constitutional controls.

Both parties are tired of the current administration’s policy of "leading from behind" and the failure to recognize America’s necessary role in the world as a moral, political, economic, military and freedom-loving leader.

Trump plays to our fears and anger like a master musician. He’s also a master marketer, the ultimate deal maker. And he just might win the Republican nomination and the general election to boot. If so, many question what lies on the other side of November. Will the petulance and pettiness continue? Or will Trump rise above the fray to lead us to a new degree of American unity, moral clarity and global leadership? Time will tell.

All I know is what the Bible says in James 1:20: "The anger of man does not produce the righteousness of God.” In other words, anger, in the long run, usually accomplishes very little. Anger may be the necessary spark to get people moving, but if anger is all a person has, then they will eventually burn down the very thing they’re trying to recover and rescue.

It remains to be seen if America will burn down the house in an angry, directionless revolution or if we will rediscover and re-embrace a sane, principled, constitutional, morally centered and freedom-loving convictional view of who we are as Americans and our place in this world.

Kevin Shrum is pastor of Inglewood Baptist Church.

Kevin Shrum (Photo: Submitted)

Synopsis

Americans are angry over the decay of their country.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1ph2ieU