“Right now, nothing else is important,” Messi said. “All I wanted was to raise the Cup.”

The thrilling finish fit with a tournament that ended up being more about the games than pessimists had predicted. While organizers worried about a repeat of last year’s Confederations Cup, a tournament marred by violent protests, the level of visible vitriol over the past month was relatively low. Even after Brazil’s national team was embarrassed in the semifinal — and lost again in the third-place game Saturday — forecasts of widespread tumult were never realized.

Photo

That does not mean there was not unrest. Hundreds of protesters gathered at their usual spot in the city center Sunday afternoon and marched through the streets in an anti-FIFA demonstration. They were met by a large cadre of Brazilian police officers, and there were instances of tear gas, as well as batons, being used on protesters, according to reports.

The city was also filled with traveling fans, many of them from Argentina. It was estimated that as many as 100,000 Argentines traveled across the border, and a vast majority seemed to settle in Copacabana or other neighborhoods along the water. That most did not have tickets to the final was irrelevant; they were here to eat, drink, dance and, once kickoff finally arrived, watch the match among the masses.

One Argentine who was not in Brazil, however, was the country’s president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. Kirchner declined an invitation from President Dilma Rousseff of Brazil, citing a lingering illness and a desire to celebrate her grandson’s first birthday with her family. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany did make the trans-Atlantic trip, as did Vladimir Putin, the president of Russia, which will host the World Cup in 2018.

They saw a match that began with a surging pace and featured a bit of controversy, too, as Christoph Kramer, a young German midfielder, became at least the third player in this tournament to return to the field shortly after sustaining an obvious head injury. Kramer was ultimately replaced about 10 minutes after colliding with an Argentine opponent and was clearly dazed, adding more fuel to a debate about soccer’s lack of a comprehensive protocol for dealing with head injuries.

Argentina will ultimately rue missed opportunities that could have — and perhaps should have — changed the tenor of the game. The first came after about 20 minutes, when Gonzalo Higuaín somehow missed the net completely after Toni Kroos inexplicably headed the ball back toward his own goal, leaving Higuaín with a gift of an opening. Soon after, Higuaín scored but was ruled offside.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That was followed by Messi, just after halftime, yanking a shot wide as he tried for the far post on a break into the penalty area. Then, in extra time, Rodrigo Palacio, in alone with Neuer, chipped his shot over the goalkeeper but wide of the frame.

Argentina finished the game with 10 shots but only two shots on goal.

“We are gutted,” said Javier Mascherano, who grabbed his head in disbelief after seeing Higuaín’s first miss. “The pain will be for life because this was our opportunity.”

Germany was more efficient. The Germans came close just before halftime when Benedikt Höwedes blasted a header off the goal post, and Germany kept pressure on Argentina goalkeeper Sergio Romero, putting seven of its 10 shots on goal.

The extra time was slower — understandably as the players slogged through the end of their seventh game of the tournament — and Germany finally seized its moment seven minutes before the end. André Schürrle powered down the left side of the field and floated a tantalizing ball toward the side of the six-yard box. Götze, who had come on as a substitute for Miroslav Klose, showed good speed to arrive under the ball and chest it down. He lashed it past Romero and into the net, prompting an all-out sprint from his teammates on the German bench as they poured onto the field in delight.

“It is absolutely sensational,” Götze said. “A dream became reality.”

Argentina had a few last-ditch rushes upfield but struggled to penetrate Neuer’s penalty area, and the team was left with a final opportunity when Messi lined up a free kick from about 20 yards.

The Argentine fans craned their necks, and Coach Alejandro Sabella crouched down in expectation. But there was no magic as Messi’s shot flew over the net. It was over. Sabella shook his head with frustration. Messi kicked the dirt. And up in the stands, the German fans — as well as the Brazilians — shouted out with glee.