Portland Congressman Earl Blumenauer won a big victory this week when Medicare officials said they plan to reimburse doctors for talking with seniors about their wishes for end-of-life care.

The Democratic lawmaker first brought this concept to Congress and was working without controversy to include the provisions in the new federal health care legislation six years ago -- until former GOP vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin charged that these provisions showed the Obama administration wanted to set up "death panels" that would decide who would and would not get live-saving care.

The ensuing controversy helped keep Blumenauer's provision out of the Affordable Care Act and kept the Obama administration from acting until now.

Blumenauer talked with The Oregonian/OregonLive from Washington, D.C., Friday about his belated win and why he thinks it is important to get people talking about end-of-life care long before they are confronted with it.

The conversation was edited for clarity and for brevity.

Q: Why did it take so long for Medicare to act?

BLUMENAUER: It's been such a struggle. It is no secret that even though the Sarah Palin death panel claim deserved to be PolitiFact's 2009 political lie of the year, it nonetheless created a lot of controversy and it was an effective tool that opponents of the Affordable Care Act used to create doubt.

There are studies that showed that several years later, 20 percent of the population still thought death panels were part of the Affordable Care Act. Even though it had no substance, it had resonance.

It was very difficult to get people aligned on this and to follow through on. It's like most things in politics, it's harder than it should have been."

Q: Why do you think this is needed? Aren't a lot of these conversations already taking place in doctors' offices?

BLUMENAUER: Actually, that's not the case. There are some, but when I first introduced this proposal and it was approved unanimously by the House Ways and Means Committee, one of the Republican doctors on the committee said, "You know, I have these conversations quite often, but usually they are too late."

They don't happen at a time when people can evaluate what their choices are and be able to make reasonable decisions involving their family. There's very strong evidence that if we are sick or old, it's harder for us to evaluate the evidence. And if we are in the midst of a medical emergency, it is absolutely too late.

Q: How is this Medicare decision – which won't take effect until sometime after a 60-day public comment period – going to change things?

For the very first time, the federal government will put a value on this conversation. It's ironic that Medicare will pay for thousands of medical procedures, some of them very, very expensive, and maybe some that would actually shorten a person's life -- like a serious operation on somebody who's got late stage terminal cancer, and they're having a hip operation. But it will not pay $100 or $200 so their family and their medical provider of choice can talk through the situation.

Patients are more likely to do it if they don't have to pay for it out of pocket, physicians are more likely to do it if they get paid for it. Because it is now accepted, it's something that's going to make it easier for people to do when it is not always the most comfortable conversation to have.

Secondly, there's more more public awareness about this need for advanced care planning, there's more awareness about what choices people have, and that's absolutely critical to have the awareness because unless somebody thinks to ask and follows through, it's not going to happen.

Q: Palin said on her Facebook page this week that she is right about death panels because "faceless bureaucrats" will decide who lives and who dies as the government rations health care.

BLUMENAUER: She absolutely continues to be unable to read legislation and she doesn't read regulations any better than she reads legislation. All this does is permit a person to choose to have a conversation. They pick with whom they want to have the conversation with. It's not somebody from the government.

Q: But does she have a point that the Affordable Care Act will lead to new restrictions on what Medicare covers?

BLUMENAUER: That has nothing to do with having this conversation with your physician. And the evidence is that the provisions in the Affordable Care Act are actually working to improve the quality of health care.

For instance the latest decisions (aimed at better coordinating medical care) just say, "Wait a minute, we're not going to just pay you for your mistake. You know, the more that you mess up, the more we're going to pay you." That's changing.

She's wrong about my provision and she's wrong about the efforts to improve Medicare. I mean, what does she think happens with benevolent insurance companies, which used to cut people off with lifetime limits and used to withdraw people from health care when they got sick? Why wasn't she concerned about that?

Ninety percent of the public supports this. Dr. Atul Gawande's book, "Being Mortal," rocketed onto the New York Times bestseller list, it was actually referenced in Billy Graham's last book about how this is a Christian responsibility to spare loved ones from guessing about what our wishes are. There are now insurance companies that are moving in this direction. This is pretty mainstream now. It's just a case of the federal government catching up where the practice of medicine is going.

--Jeff Mapes

jmapes@oregonian.com

503-221-8209

@jeffmapes