Penalty charges of up to £30 for missing repayments on payday loans 'are illegal'

Rip-off penalty charges on payday loans are 'illegal', it has been revealed



They should reflect the actual administration cost of pursuing payment

Most leading lenders, including Wonga, have default fees of £20 or more



Rip-off penalty charges imposed by payday loan giants on borrowers who miss a repayment may be illegal, it has emerged.

Under the law, any charges imposed in these circumstances should reflect the actual administration cost of pursuing the payment.

A maximum figure of £12 is used by some payday loan companies and most credit card firms.

'Illegal' charges: Rip-off penalty charges imposed by payday loan giants on borrowers who miss a repayment may be illegal, it has emerged. Leading payday lender Wonga (above) has the highest default fees at £30

However, ten of 17 leading payday lenders have default fees of £20 or more, and four charged £25 and above, with Wonga topping the table at £30.

Legal experts at the consumer group Which? claim the penalty charges imposed by many of the firms are excessive and therefore illegal.

It has written to the highest charging firms warning them that its legal advice is that the fees are unlawful under the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations 1999 (UTCCRs).

High charges are one of the biggest factors that tip borrowers into a spiral of debt with small loans suddenly ballooning in size.



Concern: High charges are one of the biggest factors that tip borrowers into a spiral of debt (file picture)

Previous Which? research has found that more than half of payday loan users – 56per cent - had incurred charges for missed or bounced credit repayments over 12 months.

One in five said they had been hit with ‘unexpected charges’.

In 2006, the Office of Fair Trading found that penalty charges for credit cards should be no more than £12, unless there are exceptional factors.

Which? has been calling for the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) to introduce a cap on the level that firms can charge in default fees, as part of plan to put a cap on the total cost of credit from January 2015.

Accusation: Which? Executive director Richard Lloyd, said: 'We believe payday lenders are exploiting borrowers with excessive fees'

Research by the organisation found that half – 48per cent - of payday loan users took out credit it turned out they could not afford to repay.

E xecutive director at the group, Richard Lloyd, said: ‘We believe payday lenders are exploiting borrowers with excessive fees which can push them even further into debt.

‘If they cannot justify why these charges are so high and refuse to cut them, we would look to take further steps to protect vulnerable consumers.

The regulator must also take action to ensure all fees are fair, proportionate and only reflect lenders’ costs.’

Which? recently launched its ‘Clean up Credit’ campaign which calls for the FCA to clamp down on excessive charges and irresponsible lending, and to make sure borrowers are being treated fairly whatever form of credit they’re using.

Wonga said its £30 penalty fee has been independently assessed by outside business consultants as a fair reflection of its admin costs.

A spokesman said: ‘We charge a one-off default fee of £30 on late repayments that reflects the additional costs we incur in collecting these loans. This charge has been independently assessed as reflecting these expenses.

‘As with all our costs, we are completely transparent about our default fee and it’s clear to customers when they apply for a loan, and at least three further times before their repayment date.