Fale Drumming members perform Saturday during a demonstration of West African drumming and dancing at the Loveland Public Library. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The five dancers in a West African dance collective engage the same moves, but what they do isn't perfectly matched.

"You don't all look the same," said Mary Pilgrim, a dancer and drummer with the African Drum and Dance Collective of Fort Collins. "You add your essence to the movement and make it your own."

The African Drum and Dance Collective gave a 1-hour, 15-minute interactive presentation of traditional West African drum and dance Saturday at the Loveland Public Library.

The collective demonstrated combined drumming and dancing to show the nearly 50 people in attendance the rhythms, sounds and movements particular to Guinea.

After two dance demonstrations, drummer Ryan Schmidt explained what the collective was doing, calling the group a fale, a word from the susu language meaning bridge. The collective acts as a bridge between West African dance and the Front Range, he said.

The first of the two dances was a manhood, coming-of-age ceremony, followed by a harvest dance, where one of the dancers wears a yamama mask to represent the protective spirit and the other dancers request a bounty.

The dancers' moves reflect the theme of each dance, such as the motions of hoeing and gathering for the harvest dance, Pilgrim said. The dances have a tradition behind them from coming of age to a harvest, fishing or a celebration.

Advertisement

The music is reflective of language, so that the rhythms and sounds mimic actual words, Schmidt said.

"This is an outgrowth of everyday life," he said. "The music mimics language. The dance mimics everyday moves and tasks."

The dancers gave the attendees a lesson on some of those moves.

"We're going to go really slow, and the drums are going to help you," said Jen Todd, a dancer from Fort Collins.

Nine-year-old Danika Eisentraut, left, and Sadie Gudmestad, 7, wear lapa skirts that are traditional wear from Guinea in West Africa as they dance together to the music of the Fale Drummers during a drum and dance demonstration Saturday at the Loveland Public Library. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The dancers passed out lapas, skirt with drawstrings made out of material from Africa, to the attendees who wanted to participate in the kuku dance, a celebration of a good fishing day.

"I love this dance, because when you do it and do the dance moves, you feel happier," said dancer Carla Alejos.

As they move, the dancers listen to cues, or calls or breaks, from the drummers to start, stop and change their motions, Schmidt said. They know how to start together with the initial drum call, which identifies the tempo and the starting point, he said.

"It's fun, and I like the fast movement and the sound of the drums," said Lauren Lant, 10, the youngest dancer in the group.

The drummers — there were six — used a trio of drums called the dunduns that provide the rhythmic and melodic base; a djembe, a drum shaped like a cup made of tropical wood and goat skin; and a shaker.

"It was awesome. I felt like I was in Africa and it was a very cultural experience," said Desirae Holdaway of Loveland.

The collective, fcdrumandance.com, offers drum and dance classes.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com