Patti Stanger became famous for being the Millionaire Matchmaker on Bravo. It appears she believes it’s time to go to another network. Patti Stanger has announced that she won’t be bringing her Millionaire Matchmaker show back to Bravo for an eighth season, but it seems as if the program will be living on in some form on another channel.

Patti Stanger took to Twitter to make the announcement, and she was less than subtle about the fact that this is the end of Millionaire Matchmaker on Bravo but not the end of the show centered on her dating agency entirely.

After 8 seasons I’ve decided to leave @Bravotv Thank u 4 the great ride. Stay tuned for exciting news as I move to a wonderful new network! — Patti Stanger (@pattistanger) July 10, 2015

It seems as if the split between Patti Stanger and Bravo was pretty amicable, considering the network issued a goodbye note, according to Entertainment Weekly.

“We loved watching Patti Stanger find love for so many people over the last 8 seasons on Bravo,” said a Bravo spokesperson. “We wish her the best with her new endeavors.”

There isn’t any immediate news on whether or not Millionaire Matchmaker will take on a new look on this new network, or whether Patti Stanger is going to go in a new direction. Certainly playing matchmaker for millionaires is how Patti Stanger made her name and made her money.

It’s also clear she loved to give advice to the people she matched up. You have to wonder if maybe the Millionaire Matchmaker might be looking to have more of a dating advice show. Whatever move she makes, it’s pretty obvious she has a client base that isn’t going anywhere. She’s hooked up some pretty top notch celebrities, including the likes of Perez Hilton. She’s had success in Millionaire Matchmaker even if her own personal life has had some bumps in the road. It wasn’t that long ago the television personality split from her own longtime boyfriend.

“Before you hear it from anyone else, i wanted to let you know myself — David and I broke up,” she wrote in June. “It’s unfortunate for a million and one reasons and obviously hard and sad for both of us.”

For now, we’ll just have to wonder where Patti Stanger is taking her Millionaire Matchmaker talents and what she’s going to do with them.

[Photo by Michael Buckner/Getty Images for FIJI]