President Barack Obama on Wednesday called on Israel’s prime minister to help shake up the status quo with Palestinians as the sides seek to find a more lasting peace in the region.

“I think we also recognize that we have to find ways to change the status quo so that both Israeli citizens are safe in their own homes, school children in their schools, from the possibility of rocket fire, but also that we don’t have the tragedy of Palestinian children being killed as well,” Obama said while seated next to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in the Oval Office.

The two leaders met for the first time since U.S. criticism of civilian casualties in the Gaza conflict this summer, comments that added tensions to an already uneasy relationship.

U.S. efforts to broker peace between Israelis and Palestinians have faltered, and Obama again challenged Israel during remarks to the U.N. General Assembly last week. “The violence engulfing the region today has made too many Israelis ready to abandon the hard work of peace. And that’s something worthy of reflection within Israel,” he said at the U.N.

In addition to Israel’s relations with Palestinians, Obama and Netanyahu said they would discuss the international coalition against Islamic State militants, also referred to as ISIS, in the Middle East and international nuclear talks with Iran, which faces a looming deadline.

“Israel fully supports your efforts and your leadership to defeat ISIS. We think everybody should support it,” Netanyahu said. “Even more critical is our shared goal is preventing Iran from becoming a military nuclear power.”

Netanyahu and Israeli officials have expressed concern in recent weeks that Western powers will make concessions to Iran in talks to gain its support in the battle against Islamic State.

“The Islamic Republic is now trying to bamboozle its way to an agreement that will remove the sanctions it still faces and leave it with a capacity of thousands of...centrifuges to enrich uranium. This would effectively cement Iran’s place as a threshold military nuclear power,” he said earlier this week at the U.N.

Tehran insists that it is pursuing nuclear capabilities for peaceful aims.

The U.S. and Israeli leaders last met in March, while the Israelis and Palestinians were still involved in a U.S.-mediated peace process. Those talks ultimately dissolved without an agreement.

More from MarketWatch