Associated Press

A look at some recent surveys and reports dealing with risk and compliance issues. Send surveys and reports to wsjrisk@wsj.com.

Surfing to the Oldies: A survey of 2,000 consumers in the U.S. and U.K. by account security company TeleSign found 21% of respondents are using passwords that are more than 10 years old, with 47% using a password that hasn’t been changed in five years. It found 70% said that they lack confidence their passwords can properly protect their accounts, and 72% that they want to learn more about how to better keep their data secure.

“The number one tip most experts give for increasing account security and stopping the fallout from data breaches is to turn on two-factor authentication,” said Steve Jillings, CEO of TeleSign. “Yet our research shows that the majority of consumers (61%) do not know what two-factor authentication is, even though it’s available on almost every account, free to the consumer and just waiting to be turned on.”

Risky, Risky Me: Companies that have narcissistic chief executives pose a greater audit risk than those that don’t, according to researchers at the University of Arizona and Utah State University.

Whistleblower Guidance: A report from Ernst & Young’s Center for Board Matters spells out three things audit committees can do to make sure their organizations have effective whistleblower programs in place.

EMV Unawareness: A survey of 504 U.S. small-business owners by financial management firm Intuit Inc. found 42% of respondents said they had not heard of the October deadline to upgrade their card payment systems to handle chip-based credit and debit cards.

More Threats, Same Money: A survey of more than 500 cybersecurity professionals by network security firm Vectra Networks found while 62% of respondents reported more insider threats in the past year, only 34% said they expected to get more money to fight them.

No Control: A survey of more than 500 IT and security executives from cloud security company OpenDNS found 23% said their organizations have no controls in place to prevent Internet of Things devices from entering their corporate networks.

Trust Us: A review of the top 500 online retailers for their trustworthiness in the areas of online security, privacy and consumer protection practices by Online Trust Alliance found American Greetings was the most trustworthy retailer.

BYOD Threat: A survey of 160 IT professionals by data security firm Spikes Security found 52% of respondents said limited risk awareness among workers who use their own devices for work was their top mobile security threat.

2 Birds, 1 Stone: A report from Acams says companies that supplement their anti-money laundering audits with an independent financial crime audit will be better able to detect and deter a broader set of financial risks.

Digital Theft: A report from payment solutions firm Vesta Corp. looks at a new threat in the retail fraud landscape: fast fraud, which involves stealing digital goods and reselling them on the secondary market.

Sharing and Leaking: A survey of 300 IT professionals by Ctera Networks found 35% of respondents said their organizations had lost data because employees shared files through unsanctioned systems.

Security Shift: A survey of 200 people working at large companies in the U.K, France and Germany by Pierre Audoin Consultants found those businesses spend 77% of their security budget on prevent-and-protect systems—but that number will drop to 61% in two years as more firms move to a detect-and-respond approach.

How Much For That Breach?: A report on data breaches from the U.K. government and PwC found the average cost of a breach now is $2.2 million—more than double the $921,000 cost last year.

Feeling Weak: Traders see compliance reporting as the greatest weakness of their energy/commodity trading and risk management system, according to a survey of more than 100 energy trading and risk management professionals by software and technology services company SunGard.

World of Enforcement: Non-U.S. countries reported 15 foreign bribery enforcement actions in 2014, while the U.S. had 13, according to a report from anti-bribery advocacy organization Trace International.

Write to Ben DiPietro at ben.dipietro@dowjones.com, and follow him on Twitter @BenDiPietro1.