HARRISBURG- Local Democrats met in Harrisburg Saturday night, but local races weren't the main topic of conversation.

Instead, attendees and speakers at the Dauphin County Democrats Annual Fall Banquet Dinner talked about the importance of getting their Democratic candidates elected to the state's Supreme Court on Nov. 3.

Three positions are up for grabs on the highest court, something that hasn't happened in the Commonwealth since 1704.

Everything of importance eventually goes through the Supreme Court, said former U.S. Rep. Joseph Sestak, who addressed the crowd of about 180 people at the AFSCME Conference Center.

The races for Supreme Court are more important than his own, said Sestak, who is seeking the Democratic Party nomination for U.S. Senate in 2016. His Democratic opponent, Katie McGinty, did not attend the dinner.

Sestak cited several national controversial issues that were decided by the U.S. Supreme Court including the Affordable Care Act and the Citizens United decision that reshaped the business of politics.

Democrats said issues important to Pennsylvanians that will likely end up before the state's Supreme Court include pensions, redistricting and voter ID laws.

Redistricting to correct gerrymandering was a common theme among candidates who spoke Saturday night.

"We are not going to have the opportunity again to take control of the Supreme Court," said Christine Donahue, a Democratic Supreme Court. "We are talking about doing nothing but applying the law. You are not supposed to cut towns in half."

Democrats outnumber Republicans in the Commonwealth but Republicans still control the legislature and congressional districts, said Brad Koplinski, who is working on the campaign to elect Kevin Dougherty to the Supreme Court.

All three Democratic candidates for Supreme Court, including David Wecht, attended the dinner.

Candidates for local office used their time with the microphone Saturday to implore Democrats to get their friends and neighbors to the polls during an election cycle that typically doesn't electrify.

Swatara Township Vice President Tom Connolly, who is running for a seat on the Dauphin County Commission, said the upcoming election could put two Democrats on the three-member commission for the first time.

Candidates who attended the dinner Saturday night brought pamphlets, buttons and yard signs for supporters to distribute.

Shamaine Daniels, second vice chair of the Democratic committee, said the annual dinner serves as a fundraiser and a social opportunity.

"But we also get some work done," she said, referring to the distribution of campaign materials. "We only have a few more weeks (until the election.)"

Rogette Harris, chairwoman of the Dauphin County Democratic Committee said voters need to turn out.

"If you don't vote, you give your power away," she said.