By Henry J. Cordes

World-Herald staff writer

When Victor Lee, the CEO of Boone County Health Center in Albion, Nebraska, looks over the vast landscape of health care in rural America, he sees alarming trends.

Dozens of rural hospitals across the country have recently closed, including one in Nebraska. His own books show declining margins, falling federal reimbursements and ever-growing amounts of care delivered to patients with no health insurance or ability to pay.

Unless something is done, Lee sees a bleak outlook for health care in the heartland.

“I’ve been in this business 45 years,” he said, “and this last year is the most dire I’ve seen.”

Rural health advocates warn a crisis is rising across the nation’s countryside — one with the potential to ratchet up the Statehouse debate over whether to expand Medicaid to cover more low-income, uninsured Nebraskans.

Nationwide since 2010, 68 rural hospitals have closed, the pace accelerating with each year. A recent study by a health care finance consultant also identified hundreds of other rural hospitals it said are in danger of closing — a list that includes 15 in Nebraska.

And the vast majority of hospitals that have closed or are on the critical list are in states that haven’t expanded Medicaid. Some rural health advocates say it’s time for Nebraska to join the 31 other states that have partnered with the federal government to extend the program to more of the uninsured.

“If you look at the map, you can’t deny where hospitals have closed and where there’s great vulnerability of more closing, those are the states that didn’t expand Medicaid,” said Maggie Elehwany of the National Rural Health Association.

But Gov. Pete Ricketts and his administration say Medicaid expansion would be a bad idea for rural Nebraska and the entire state, putting state finances at “huge financial risk.” He said he’d prefer to explore other, less expensive options that would both stabilize funding for rural hospitals and help people who lack insurance.

“I think everyone would agree there’s an issue here,” he said in an interview. “The path people are taking with Medicaid expansion is the wrong one.”

The issue of whether Nebraska should expand Medicaid has long been politically charged, in large part driven by strong and entrenched feelings over President Barack Obama’s controversial health care law.

But behind the heated politics are some staggering numbers and weighty issues. Virtually everyone in Nebraska is affected, regardless of whether they’re among the estimated 100,000 low-income Nebraskans — most of them in the ranks of the working poor — who could gain insurance under the expansion bill pending in the Legislature.

One issue that has received scant attention in the debate has been the relative health of health care in Nebraska’s small towns.

Both sides agree: The current financial state of rural hospitals is much broader than Medicaid expansion. The recent closings have been driven by a mix of falling rural populations, fundamental changes in health care delivery and changes in federal financing for hospitals.

But expansion advocates say Medicaid expansion can’t be overlooked as a factor, particularly with the strong correlation between hospital closures and whether states have expanded the program. Nearly three-fourths of the recent rural hospital closures have been in the 19 states that haven’t expanded Medicaid.

The recent study by health care consultant iVantage Health Analytics found a similar correlation: 35 percent of hospitals in nonexpansion states were vulnerable to closing, compared with 20 percent in expansion states.

iVantage’s report and the rural health association also cite a direct link between the declining hospital revenues and Medicaid expansion.

Congress earlier this decade slashed federal payments to hospitals for caring for the indigent and uninsured. Part of the thinking was that hospitals would make up the money by seeing more insured patients under Obamacare, including the program’s expansion of Medicaid. But because Nebraska didn’t expand Medicaid, its hospitals have faced the federal cuts but haven’t seen the influx of insured patients — directly impacting their bottom lines.

“We got all the cuts but we didn’t get any of the gravy,” said Marty Fattig, CEO of Nemaha County Hospital in Auburn.

The issue of expanding health insurance coverage is arguably bigger in small-town Nebraska than in the rest of the state.

Not only are some rural hospitals troubled financially, Nebraska’s rural counties also have the state’s highest rates of residents without insurance — the broader problem Obamacare was intended to help solve.

Of the 37 Nebraska counties with the highest rates of uninsured, 32 are rural, according to data from the University of Nebraska at Omaha’s Center for Public Affairs Research. In all, 13.6 percent of rural residents lack insurance, compared with 12.3 percent in Nebraska’s metro areas.

Despite that, the opposition to Medicaid expansion is most strong in Nebraska’s rural areas.

Of those 32 highest-uninsured rural counties, almost three-fourths are represented by state senators who a year ago helped kill a Medicaid expansion bill. Outside Nebraska’s metro areas, opponents of expansion outnumbered supporters on that vote more than two to one.

State Sen. Al Davis of Hyannis, who supported Medicaid expansion last year but is still weighing this year’s bill, said there’s no doubt many rural constituents strongly oppose expansion. “It’s anathema to a lot of people,” he said.

Sen. Ken Schilz of Ogallala represents eight of the counties with the highest uninsurance rates. He said he’s sympathetic to those without insurance. But he said he shares the governor’s long-term concerns about paying for it, especially if the federal government ultimately backs out of paying for the bulk of the program.

“It’s been a tough one to figure out how to (help the uninsured) and be fiscally responsible for everything else,” he said.

Rural health care advocates say maintaining hospitals is critical for both the physical and economic health of small towns. Public funding from government health care programs has long been key to rural hospitals’ survival.

After a rash of rural hospital closings during the 1980s and 1990s, Congress helped put in place a financial safety net.

Many rural hospitals, including 64 in Nebraska and 82 in Iowa, gained status as “critical access hospitals.” That made them eligible for more generous federal reimbursement rates under Medicare, the federal health care program for the elderly. Other special federal payment programs for rural hospitals were also created, all intended to help them keep their doors open.

But that financial safety net appears to be fraying.

Rural hospital closures have escalated rapidly in recent years, from just three in 2010 to 18 last year. There have already been four closures through the first two months of 2016.

By far the most have been in the South: 10 in Texas, six in Tennessee and five each in Alabama and Georgia. But there have also been growing numbers in the Great Plains, including two each in Kansas, Minnesota and Missouri and one each in Nebraska and South Dakota.

The hospital in Tilden, Nebraska — a critical access hospital — joined the list in June 2014 after years of struggles.

The hospital in Norfolk stepped in and established an outpatient clinic in Tilden, hiring about half the hospital’s former workers. But the closure still cost Tilden about 35 good-paying jobs as well as local in-patient and emergency room service.

The rural closures to date could be just the beginning.

iVantage, which specializes in rural health, last month compared the financial performance of the nation’s 2,100 rural hospitals with those that have already closed. It determined some 673 hospitals — employing nearly 100,000 workers — shared similar characteristics to the closed hospitals and were thus vulnerable. That was up from 283 in a similar analysis two years earlier.

“Rural hospitals have not nearly seen the worst of this yet,” said Michael Topchik, who heads the rural health division at iVantage. “We really do see a crisis mounting.”

Topchik declined to identity the 15 Nebraska hospitals found to be vulnerable. His company shares its data with the hospitals but doesn’t release it publicly, for fear of harming the facilities.

Topchik and rural health officials cite a number of factors behind the critical state of many rural hospitals.

There have been declining patient numbers due to both general population decline and shifts in health care to more outpatient care. Rural hospitals also can’t take advantage of economies of scale and often aren’t big enough to engage in more lucrative specialty services, in Nebraska often sending such patients to bigger facilities in Omaha and Lincoln.

However, rural health officials say the problems also directly relate to federal and state policy.

Since 2013, the federal “sequester” budget cuts have reduced payments under Medicare by 2 percent. Those cuts especially hit rural hospitals, which generally serve older and sicker populations than those in cities.

Additionally, Congress in 2012 cut the amount of reimbursements to hospitals for providing free care to the poor and uninsured, often referred to as “charity care” or “bad debt.” Those cuts were particularly deep for rural hospitals, with their federal dollars in that program cut by a third. The cuts were justified by the new business the hospitals would see through Obamacare and Medicaid expansion.

What no one anticipated was the subsequent U.S. Supreme Court decision in 2012 that made participation in Medicaid expansion optional for states.

As states took up the issue, it became highly politicized and partisan. Democratic governors largely embraced expansion. Most Republicans, including Ricketts and his predecessor Gov. Dave Heineman, fought it, spurning the billions of dollars of federal funds the program offered to help cover the poor.

Nebraska declined almost $1 billion during the first three years of the program, when the federal government provided 100 percent of the funding. States will be required to pick up 10 percent of the cost by 2021.

Today, the remaining nonexpansion states are largely located in the South and Great Plains — the same places hospitals are now most troubled.

In the iVantage study, 21 percent of Nebraska’s rural hospitals were seen as vulnerable. That compared with 14 percent in Iowa and 20 percent in Colorado, the two neighboring states that have expanded Medicaid.

In the four adjacent states that haven’t expanded Medicaid, vulnerable hospitals numbered 48 percent in Missouri, 36 percent in South Dakota, 29 percent in Kansas and 14 percent in Wyoming.

Topchik said he thinks the federal cuts and states’ decisions not to expand Medicaid are now catching up to many rural hospitals. “There’s no question expanding Medicaid is an important safety net for rural providers,” he said.

Advocates for rural hospitals are now calling on Congress to restore the sequester cuts as well as urging the remaining states to expand Medicaid.

In the Nebraska Legislature, supporters are taking a different approach to Medicaid expansion this year, with a new “private option’’ modeled on Arkansas’ program. Rather than adding more low-income uninsured to the Medicaid rolls, the bill would use the federal dollars to help the uninsured buy private insurance.

But the biggest barrier remains the cost to the state, estimated by the Legislature’s fiscal staff to be about $22 million a year over the next five years. Ricketts warns the costs would go much higher if the federal government ever backs away from its pledge to fund 90 percent of the program.

Now the issue of rural hospital closings could add fuel to the debate. Lee, the Albion hospital administrator, said his hospital isn’t in any imminent danger of closing. But he said if Ricketts and the Legislature don’t move to expand Medicaid, he has little doubt the state will see more closures.

“I don’t think the governor fully understands the ramifications, and if he does he doesn’t care or doesn’t believe it,” Lee said. “But it’s real. A lot of people in rural Nebraska are going to lose access to health care.”

Ricketts said he has certainly spoken with rural hospital administrators who say Medicaid expansion would help their facilities, but he has also heard from some who oppose it. He said he’d welcome the chance to sit down with rural hospital leaders to explore solutions to their finance concerns.

He said he’s also hoping a change of administration in Washington next year will allow the states to pursue more flexible ways to help the uninsured besides expanding Medicaid.

“I’m always willing to look at how we can do a better job in all our programs,” he said.

Calder Lynch, tabbed by Ricketts last year as Medicaid director in the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services, said there are ways Nebraska could help rural hospitals within the regular Medicaid program, such as enhanced reimbursements for telemedicine and other remotely provided care.

“Access to health care in rural communities is very important to us,” he said. “I’d invite any health care provider to come to the table and talk about other ways to create more sustainable funding streams.”

Fattig, the Auburn hospital administrator, said no one should lose track of the people at the center of the debate: those who have no insurance, often through no fault of their own. Contrary to what some suggest, he said, most of those who would be helped are working people who simply don’t make enough money to afford insurance — and their health and finances suffer for it.

He cited the case of a young woman locally who worked three part-time jobs but took home a modest income. She was not eligible for traditional Medicaid but not making enough to qualify for Obamacare subsidies to buy her own insurance.

One summer evening, the woman fell off a balcony and landed on her head and neck. Because she knew she couldn’t pay, she initially didn’t go to the hospital.

When Fattig’s wife ran into the woman downtown and saw her swollen neck and obvious pain, she insisted the woman seek care. A scan at Fattig’s hospital showed the woman had broken a bone in her neck.

Fattig said his hospital through its charity care program was able to stabilize her with a cervical collar and prescribed medications. But a specialist in Lincoln declined to see her because she lacked insurance. She’s doing OK now, Fattig said, but he worries about her long-term health.

“What’s right about that?” he said of her story. “In my opinion, that’s the kind of person we need to cover.”