After months of hard-hitting ads and counterattacks, the Republican Party Primary contest between Jay Fant and Paul Renner found them in a virtual dead heat on election night, with Fant ahead by a scant three votes.

That’s three votes out of 11,891 votes cast in the race for House District 15 on Jacksonville’s Westside, the most competitive contest in Northeast Florida and among the most watched statewide.

The next step will be the counting of provisional ballots. After that, a recount of all ballots appears likely Wednesday afternoon.

“We want every vote counted and we’ll wait for the final results,” said Sarah Bascom, spokeswoman for the Renner campaign. “The race is not over. We’re still very positive and hopeful that we’ll come out of this as the chosen primary candidate.”

The Fant campaign could not be reached for comment.

Florida election law requires an automatic recount if the margin of victory is less than one-half of 1 percent.

No Democrats filed for the seat, so the Republican Party primary contest between Fant and Renner is the pivotal race in determining who will replace Daniel Davis in the seat.

The Republican nominee will face write-in candidates Calvin T. White and Kerry Keith Kelley in the November general election.

Fant and Renner both faced an onslaught of political ads by third-party groups.

The ads against Fant attacked his management of First Guaranty Bank and Trust, which failed in 2012. Fant said the bank, which his grandfather founded, ran into financial problems like other community banks did in the fallout of the real estate bust and the Great Recession.

Third-party groups contended Renner had a plan to turn poker rooms into “mini-casinos,” which Renner denied by saying he opposed expansion of gambling in Florida and he signed a pledge with the No Casinos group stating his opposition to expansion of gambling.

Davis, who is president of JAX Chamber, endorsed Renner to replace him. But both candidates notched an array of endorsements from elected officials and business groups.

The District 15 seat stretches from the Riverside and Avondale neighborhoods all the way to the Duval-Baker county line.

Renner, 47, and Fant, 46, are both political newcomers. They ran on conservative platforms and vowed to fight against Florida expanding Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act.

Both supported deepening the St. Johns River for bigger cargo ships and said the state needs to pare back business regulations.

David Bauerlein: (904) 359-4581