September 17, 2015 - In a "clean room" at Smith & Nephew Makesha Davis inspects parts before shipping. The medical device maker will be adding additional machinist and skilled labor positions. (Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal)

SHARE September 17, 2015 - Senior machinist Daniel Carter seats parts into a mediical device. Medical device maker Smith & Nephew will be adding additional machinist and skilled labor positions. (Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal) September 17, 2015 - Machinists and skilled labor wokers are positions medical device maker Smith & Nephew is needing, in order to keep up with consumer demand. (Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal) September 17, 2015 - Gene Baker, Smith & Nephew. (Stan Carroll/The Commercial Appeal)

By Kevin McKenzie of The Commercial Appeal

Smith & Nephew Inc. recently dismantled an office in a Memphis manufacturing plant in Memphis to make way for more computer-controlled machines. Today, 12-hour shifts produce knee implants around the clock, seven days a week.

Demand is strong for the London-based medical device maker's products in the United States and in faster-growing emerging markets around the globe.

That growth is feeding another high demand -- for the machinists, finishers and packagers producing those knee implants in Building H on the low-profile Smith & Nephew campus on Brooks Road.

"Even since the beginning of this year, we've probably added 175 people," said Gene Baker, vice president of Memphis operations for Smith & Nephew. "And we're not done adding."

Perhaps surprisingly to some, Baker said the supply of job candidates to choose from is "generally speaking pretty good, better than I expect, I'm encouraged by it, actually."

He's more bullish about the future workforce. That's because of unusual efforts by the Greater Memphis Medical Device Council to work with community colleges and vocational schools to supply the skills the industry needs.

"I'm even more encouraged by the go-forward position, by working with the medical device council, working with local government, working with the educational institutions," Baker said. "I think that the future is bright for Smith & Nephew in this community because of all of the people that are working together to make it happen."

Formally founded in July 2014 to represent an industry with some 50 companies in the area, the medical device council developed specific job characteristics for machinists based on National Institute for Metalworking Skills standards, said Baker, chairman of the council.

Early this year, the council delivered those requirements in a meeting with four two-year colleges: state-run Southwest Tennessee Community College, the Tennessee College of Applied Technology Memphis, Arkansas State University Mid-South in West Memphis and a private, nonprofit college in Memphis, Moore Tech.

Moore Tech's president, Skip Redmond, said that when he arrived at the school in 2012, only manual equipment was available in the machine shop for training students to be machinists.

"Some of the equipment in there was like pre-World War II, it was a joke," Redmond said.

Before the medical device council approached, a $1.5 million upgrade of that machine shop was underway. Grants from the Assisi and Plough foundations, U.S. Department of Labor and in-kind contributions from computer-numerical-control machine makers Haas Automation and Fanuc financed it.

One of the key requests of the medical device council was certification of students by the National Institute for Metalworking Skills, Redmond said. That will become possible after two new instructors take second-level certifications in December.

"That all came about through the grants and the focus that the medical device council is asking us to do, so we're trying to do everything we can to play ball," he said.

The two-year program at Moore Tech has grown from 22 students in 2012 to 78, Redmond said. Graduates are landing jobs earning an average of about $23 an hour, or nearly $48,000 a year.

Moore Tech also is trying to develop a "right skills now" program that would make an unskilled worker off the street a machine operator in 14 weeks, he said. They could then work at a company while going to school at night to become a certified machinist.

Formerly known as the William R. Moore College of Technology, the school received about $1.7 million of a nearly $10 million federal training grant awarded last year for the Greater Memphis Alliance for a Competitive Workforce.

Steve Bares, president of the Memphis Bioworks Foundation, said the medical device industry has been a job engine unrestrained by the labor force. Smith & Nephew, Medtronic, Wright Medical Group and MicroPort Orthopedics are the Memphis industry's biggest names.

Although some officials contend the region's relatively unskilled residents are a drawback, Bares doesn't view training as a problem. He described the workforce as "a tremendous asset that Memphis has that many communities don't have."

"What Memphis has is people. Memphis has the ability to train people. We are blessed with people that can be trained and move into the industry as industry grows," Bares said.

Smith & Nephew chief executive Olivier Bohuon has cited pioneering products and "re-innovation" as a focus for the company. He pointed to the black Oxinium surface developed in Memphis and only made at a Memphis plant that was doubled in size this year.

The patented oxidized zirconium surface for hip and knee implants, first used in 1996, extends the life of the company's Verilast knees to 30 years, compared to 15 years for competitors, Baker said.

"It's really our key to growth," he said.

Smith & Nephew employs about 2,200 workers in Memphis at facilities ranging from manufacturing and distribution on Brooks or Holmes roads to administrative offices and physician education in Goodlett Farms.

Knee and hip implants for orthopedic reconstruction, trauma products such as screws and plates and tools for surgeons are made and distributed around the globe.

In early 2013, the company wasn't in hiring mode, but laying off about 60 workers in Memphis.

"Headwinds," including business in Europe, increased regulatory and medical burdens and the Affordable Care Act's medical device tax triggered the cutbacks, said Joe Metzger, a Smith & Nephew spokesman based in the Boston area for the Advanced Surgical Devices division that includes Memphis operations.

Growth is what today's business climate is triggering, Baker said. The company is projecting that it will need roughly 80 new operators – machinists, finishers and packagers – a year between 2016 and 2020, he said.

"If we can bring them in at 75 percent trained, then it saves learning curves here on the job, which helps make Memphis more competitive," Baker said.