West Virginia Secretary of State and senatorial hopeful Natalie Tennant (D) will release an attack ad criticizing GOP opponent Rep. Shelley Moore Capito Shelley Moore CapitoInvest in infrastructure to transform America Senate Republicans ask Trump to soften his tone Skittish GOP to Trump: Drop the insults MORE's ties to Wall Street.

In the ad, a male narrator criticizes Capito for drafting legislation that increased consumer credit card fees.

ADVERTISEMENT

"Just days later, a big-time credit card company gave her husband a cushy Wall Street job," the narrator says in the ad, obtained first by The Hill.

The Tennant campaign will launch the 30-second ad — dubbed "Wall Street's Secret Weapon" — in every television market across West Virginia. It will reach 80 percent of voters, and cost the campaign $415,000, according to a Tennant campaign source.

Capito campaign spokeswoman Amy Graham called the attack ad "desperate."

"Natalie Tennant has spent the last month making false and personal attacks against Shelley Moore Capito and her family in a desperate attempt to win an election," Graham said in a statement. "Today, she took her campaign to a new low in West Virginia politics by launching a new TV ad that is wrong on the facts and a disservice to the voters."

Tennant is trailing by double-digits in the polls. She has looked to portray Capito as using her seat on the House Financial Services Committee to benefit herself and Wall Street.

“Instead of talking about the issues that matter to West Virginians, Natalie Tennant has decided to spend what money she has left running vindictive ads that seek to ruin the trust voters have in Shelley Moore Capito," Graham said in a statement. "In the end, all she will end up with is a tattered image and a recognition by West Virginians that she is a person who will deceive, distort and fabricate to win.”

Capito's campaign lawyers sent a letter to West Virginia television stations denouncing an earlier Tennant campaign ad that made similar allegations, as reported earlier this month by West Virginia's MetroNews.

Responding to the allegations during a debate earlier this month, Capito said, "I've built 18 years of trust with West Virginians. They know me. They know my family."

"Wall Street's secret weapon, Congresswoman Capito, helps big banks get rich off the backs of hardworking West Virginians," the male narrator says in the ad. "Congresswoman Capito gets richer and West Virginians pay the price."

The race has drawn national attention, as well as high-profile surrogates for each campaign, including 2012 presidential nominee Mitt Romney for Capito and Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) for Tennant.

The Tennant ad makes specific reference to Capito's legislation, introduced with Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D-Fla.) in March 2011. The measure would have delayed the implementation of a regulation on "swipe fees" required by the 2010 Wall Street Reform Law, known as Dodd-Frank.

Wall Street supported Capito and Wasserman Schultz's proposed legislation, but the Democratic-controlled Senate never voted on a similar version, though a bill was introduced by Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont). The Senate rejected an amendment version of the legislation.

On March 29, 2011, Wells Fargo Advisors announced the hiring of Capito's husband, Charles Capito, as a senior vice president in their Charleston, W.Va., offices.

This story was updated at 10:15 a.m.