State lawmakers this week are taking up sweeping legislation on health care providers that has the potential to cost some Tennesseans access to quality treatment.

The bill, which will be considered by the health committees in the Tennessee Senate and House of Representatives on Wednesday, would undermine the state's certificate of need program, which regulates the establishment and expansion of health care facilities.

Little noticed outside the health care industry, certificate of need programs are designed to match health care facilities with demand and prevent the unnecessary duplication of services. Tennessee created its certificate of need program in 1974 after the U.S. Congress passed a federal health planning law requiring states to establish such regulations. The federal law was modified significantly a dozen years later.

The Tennessee Health Services and Development Agency, which manages the state's certificate of need program, must approve virtually every major expansion, new service and major equipment purchases. For example, Tennova Healthcare had to obtain a certificate of need before moving forward on construction of its planned medical center on Middlebrook Pike in Knoxville.

The bill — Senate Bill 1842/House Bill 1730 — would allow hospitals to incrementally increase the number of beds without obtaining a certificate, eliminate the need to obtain a certificate for certain hospital expansions, remove the requirement to obtain a certificate for MRI services in the state's five largest counties and other structural changes.

Supporters of the bill claim it would give providers more flexibility and create a system more free-market oriented. That view, however, disregards a fundamental aspect of the health care system — it is not a prototypical free-market segment of the economy.

As anyone who has followed the changes wrought in the American health care system by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act knows, health care is unique because insurance companies dictate providers' compensation and hospitals generally must provide emergency care regardless of whether they get paid.

If the bill goes into effect, specialized services could disappear from poorer communities and concentrate in more affluent communities, creating a system based on money rather than need. In Texas, which does not have a certificate of need program, boutique providers have sprung up around full-service hospitals, siphoning off patients with good insurance plans.

Large urban medical centers would be able to survive under the modifications contemplated by the Tennessee Legislature, but rural hospitals likely would be confronted with yet another challenge to their viability. The idea that the changes would create more competition and thus drive down costs for patients is attractive, but unlikely. The high-deductible insurance plans that are becoming more commonplace force the patient to pay the entire cost of many services before benefits kick in.

Gutting the state's certificate of need system would be unwise. Tennessee's program ensures that medical services match medical needs — the hallmark of any humane health care system.