Friends and associates Monday mourned the pilot of a plane that crashed and killed five people Sunday, a well-known Erie attorney who specialized in real estate law.

Oliver E. Frascona was killed Sunday along with his girlfriend, Tori Rains-Wedan, 41, and her three children — Mason; 15, and 11-year-old twins Austin and Hunter . A dog was also killed in the crash.

“Everyone is really sad. We lost a true reality friend,” Jolon Ruch, chairwoman of the Colorado Association of Realtors, said Saturday. “He wore the Realtor ‘R’ on his sleeve. I really respected him for that.”

The association sent e-mails to its member Sunday night confirming the tragedy, Ruch said.

Authorities had earlier released the plane’s identification number. The plane is registered to The Real Estate School LLC and Frascona is the registered agent of the plane, a Piper PA-46.

The Weld County Coroner’s Office is performing autopsies on Labor Day.

Frascona trained hundreds of real estate brokers in the Denver metro area on real estate law, colleagues said.

“His classes were always filled because he was charismatic and fun,” Ruch said. “I always referred to him as the enter-trainer because he truly was an entertainer.”

Jon Goodman was Franscona’s partner for 21 years.

“Everyone on that plane touched the lives of many. The law firm morns their tragic death. May they all live on in the memories of those that loved them,” Goodman said in a statement released Saturday.

The plane, which crashed upside down, had departed from Centennial Airport and was headed for the Erie Municipal Airport when it crashed in a field near a residential neighborhood, authorities said Sunday.

Witnesses told reporters that they heard the plane sputtering before it went completely silent.

“We knew it crashed,” Jan Culver told the Daily Camera.

Frascona lived a short distance away from where the crash happened, said acquaintances, who added that he was an avid and very experienced pilot.

Frascona was a partner in the well-established Boulder firm of Frascona, Joiner, Goodman and Greenstein P.C.

Photos of the scene showed the mangled wreckage of the six-passenger Piper, its wings just barely attached to the fuselage.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kirkmitchell