California political leaders took a very positive step, enabled by the Affordable Care Act, to expand the full-scope Medi-Cal to cover all children in the state until 19 years old, regardless of immigration status.

Children need to be cared for and coverage for all is the right move. No youth should be turned away for lack of insurance.

The expanded program becomes active May 15. Families should enroll their children now in what’s known as restricted-scope Medi-Cal, or “emergency” Medi-Cal, in order to take advantage of full-scope Medi-Cal as soon as the full program kicks in.

Families shouldn’t wait for an emergency situation to enroll. Take action now. The information they share with the state agencies or nonprofit health-care outreach groups they work with, such as the Solano Coalition for Better Health, will remain confidential.

Full-scope Medi-Cal means access for children to free or low-cost preventive services, such as annual check-ups, dental and vision care, hearing tests and mental health assessments. Children should be enrolled through local county human services office, or a local clinic. For more information, parents can visit www.localclinic.net, call toll-free (855) 899-PLUS (7587); visit www.solanocoalition.org or call (800) 978-7547; or visit www.calendow.org.

Vacaville Unified School District lead nurse Toni McCallum said this week that the county is able to insure nearly 100 percent of students. If VUSD parents indicated they have no health insurance, district officials contact the Solano Kids Insurance Program, whose representatives set up insurance for them.

Tamara Owens, director of operations for the Solano Coalition, said the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, tries to make it possible for everyone to have health coverage.

The latest expansion of Medi-Cal — or the state’s version of Medicaid — the federal-state program that helps pay for health care for the needy, aged, blind, disabled and the poor with children — enabled nonprofit outreach groups, such as the coalition, to go out and get the word out further to those in need.

What the new program does is help agencies stress to families with undocumented children that they don’t need to fear repercussions — or risk deportation — from federal immigration officials during their application for full-scope Medi-Cal.

This is a big step because those without health insurance in the state often end up using “safety nets” services, including costly emergency room visits for situations that could often be handled cheaper and easier by doctor visits. Regular, periodic visits to physicians will make an enormous difference.

Advertisement

Most Californians support the latest change to Medi-Cal and a further expansion for wider coverage for children and they should. It’s an important step for our state.