Highmark loses members, $773M in Obamacare plans

At a glance • Highmark Inc. lost $773 million on health plans bought on the federal marketplace. • Enrollment for individuals who purchased such plans stands at about 195,000 members, with about 53,000 in Western Pennsylvania. • The insurer's total membership tops 5.2 million across all types of health plans in Pennsylvania, West Virginia and Delaware.

Highmark Inc. lost $773 million through 2015 on its Obamacare insurance plans, the result of sicker-than-expected people getting treatment after buying the plans, the insurer announced Tuesday.

By the end of February, enrollment in Highmark's individual health plans had dropped from about 350,000 members to about 195,000 members. The decrease includes plans sold on and off the federal marketplace created under the Affordable Care Act, Highmark officials said.

“Our share in the market was considerably higher than we had anticipated in 2014 and 2015, and I think now what you're seeing is a market adjustment,” said Alexis Miller, Highmark's senior vice president of individual and small group markets.

Across all its commercial insurance products, including employer-based and Medicare Advantage plans, Highmark lost about 5 percent of its members in 2015, the insurer announced. Highmark is Pennsylvania's largest insurer and the fourth-largest Blue Cross Blue Shield-affiliated company in the country, said Tony Benevento, Highmark's senior vice president of regional markets.

To help cut the losses, Highmark increased premiums by an average of 20 percent for 2016, officials said. UPMC Health Plan offered lower premiums and grew its share of the individual market on and off the federal exchange to about 123,000 people, according to UPMC Health Plan spokeswoman Gina Pferdehirt.

UPMC last month said the rapid growth of its insurance plans signals there is no longer a dominant insurer in Western Pennsylvania. Instead, UPMC Health Plan, Highmark and other insurers share equal parts of the market. UPMC has said that's partly because of the steady growth of its health plan, which grew from about 813,000 members in 2014 to 1.095 million members in 2016.

About 1.4 million people living in Western Pennsylvania have commercial Highmark insurance, according to Highmark.

Highmark's enrollment total included changes from the Affordable Care Act's second open enrollment period, which ended Jan. 31.

Highmark has taken aggressive actions to cut losses related to its federal marketplace plans, shrinking networks of hospitals and doctors, reducing or eliminating commissions for brokers who sell the plans, and reducing by 4.5 percent what it pays doctors to treat patients with the plans.

Highmark's total commercial enrollment, including people who live in West Virginia and Delaware and those who live in other states but are employed by a business based in Highmark's geographical region, was about 5.2 million people, Benevento said.

James McTiernan, area vice president for national consulting firm Arthur J. Gallagher, said consumers' selection of insurers other than Highmark could help the regional market settle after two tumultuous years.

“I think the market will eventually figure this out, but my concern is that if all carriers are sustaining large underwriting losses, how long will they sustain those? How long will they stay?”

Wes Venteicher is a Tribune-Review staff writer. Reach him at 412-380-5676 or wventeicher@tribweb.com.