741 reporters — Less than half of the nation's nearly 1,600 statehouse journalists are there full time. There are an elite few 741 journalists assigned full time to cover the nation’s 50 statehouse buildings, according to the Pew Research Center. All total, including these scribes, there are just 1,592 journalists who actually go to statehouses, whether full time or temporarily on assignment, according to the study. This reflects a decline in traditional reporting methods as staffs shrink and reporting is increasingly done secondhand through fewer primary news sources.



One last $15 billion purchase – That will be the last purchase the Federal Reserve Bank will make as part of its five-year-old bond buying economic stimulus plan in October, according to minutes from a June meeting of its Federal Open Market Committee. The stock market has long waited for news about a timeline on the program so the news prompted the market to contract a bit, but the market is likely to maintain a sporadic climb featuring bouts of temporary price dips.



American kids have average finance savvy – America’s teens seem prepared to balance a checkbook as 15-year-old students in the U.S. scored about average when compared to students in other countries on an international test for financial literacy, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Overall, American students scored 492 on the test, compared with the OECD average of 500 for the exam that measures how well students can understand and apply concepts in math, reading and science to real-world situations. Still, more than 1 in 6 American students – 17.8 percent – did not reach the baseline level of proficiency. Students in China, Belgium and Estonia scored higher than the U.S.



U.S. youth not prepared for medical emergencies — The percent of uninsured Americans has dropped from 18 percent in 2013 to 13.4 percent this year, a record low due to the rush to enroll using the Affordable Care Act. That said, American youth are lagging behind other age groups, according to Gallup polling company. Americans age 18-25 include 23.9 percent of all Americans without health insurance, which is the most out of any age group. The likelihood of an American having insurance rises with their age.