Amid zingers directed at everyone from Donald Trump to himself, President Barack Obama briefly mentioned two tech giants during his final White House correspondents’ dinner Saturday evening.

The 40-minute monologue, which you can watch here, was certainly funny — well, maybe depending on your political views — and entertaining, with Obama poking fun at a bevy of topics like the current presidential race and his past eight years in office.

“Bernie, you look like a million bucks!” Obama told Bernie Sanders, the only presidential candidate in attendance. “Or to put it in terms you’ll understand: 37,000 donations of $27 each.”

Snapchat, the ultra-popular messaging app, got some air time in a video that played during Obama’s speech which showed funny scenes of him transitioning to life after the White House. At one point, Obama finds his wife’s iPhone on the table.

“Huh, she’s got Snapchat,” Obama says as he proceeds to record a video of himself encouraging folks to sign up for Obamacare.

The video then cuts to a “breaking news” report from CNN’s Wolf Blitzer about “Michelle Obama in hot water after posting this video.” The clip is the president’s recording, but overlaid with one of the creepier Snapchat Lens’ filters that distorts Obama’s voice and turns his head into a zombie (see right).

Lens’ on Snapchat are one of the more popular features of the app, allowing people to spruce up their selfies with an assortment of fun face-detecting designs and animations. It looks like Obama is still learning how to properly use them, though. He can probably learn something from the White House staffers who run the administration’s Snapchat account that launched in January.

LinkedIn also received a couple shout-outs, once during another video clip that featured former Speaker of the House John Boehner advising Obama about life after politics.

“Stop sending me all these LinkedIn requests,” Boehner tells Obama.

After the clip played, Obama brought up LinkedIn.

“I am still waiting for all of you to respond to my invitation to connect on LinkedIn,” he told the crowd. “But I know you have jobs to do, which is what really brings us here tonight.”

My other favorite moment: Obama saying “Obama Out” at the end of his speech — an ode to Kobe Bryant — before dropping the mic.