Anyone who thinks Bernie Sanders can’t win black votes should’ve seen him at a prayer breakfast in Columbia, SC, Tuesday. He may not have had enough time to erase the big lead that Hillary Clinton enjoys with the state’s African-Americans, but he’s far from hopeless on that front.

Allen University, where the prayer breakfast took place, is a small, historically black school, where every student gets at least some need-based financial aid. A few professors were pretty much the only white people in the audience, and Sanders was the only white person on stage.

Sanders, who was brought up Jewish, has said he’s not “particularly religious,” but the people next to him were ministers, and when one asked the audience to bow their heads in prayer, the senator bowed, too.

When R&B star Shirley Murdock, a born-again Christian invited to sing, asked those who had a dream to raise a hand, Sanders’ hand shot up with the others.

Sanders is an unlikely choice for the people who welcomed him at Allen. State Rep. Joe Neal (D), who is also a Baptist pastor, had to come up with a creative way to integrate the senator’s stump speech into what was essentially a prayer meeting. He recalled Sanders responding to a question about his faith by saying, “My spirituality is that we are all in this together.” “That resonated with me,” Neal said.

Sanders is a white guy of 74. At one point, he asked the audience whether any of them were around during Martin Luther King’s march on Washington. “It makes me feel really old,” he said, when no hands went up. “I was there.”

Yet the magical simplicity of Sanders’ socialist agenda does resonate with audiences, black or white. He got enthusiastic applause for the speech he has been making since Iowa, and at times, everyone rose to their feet to acknowledge the boldness of his ideas.

That speech has always contained parts about combating youth unemployment, particularly severe among blacks, and about ending arrests for marijuana possession, which give too many black youngsters a criminal record.

A local Sanders campaign staffer, who had been with him since the early days of his run, told me at the beginning, no one in South Carolina had even heard of him, but as the grapevine and the volunteers worked, he began attracting unlikely allies.

Sanders’ strategy was simple but smart: Knowing he is popular with students, the Vermonter has been purposefully touring historically black schools. He has also gone to the leftist pastors who could relate to his preaching manner and his message of sharing and compassion.

He has made a connection with Black Lives Matter activists and people close to the victims of police shootings. At a rally in Columbia on Tuesday, Sanders was accompanied by state Representative Justin Bamberg, the lawyer for the family of Walter Scott, the black motorist shot by a cop in North Charleston last year.

All this has worked to some extent. Sanders’ support among South Carolina Democrats has risen from 1.9 percent in July 2015 to about 36 percent today.

Clinton’s better name recognition is still part of it. The other part — Clinton’s pragmatic, step-by-step approach to the progressive agenda — may turn out to be more important to black voters in South Carolina than it was to almost exclusively white ones in Iowa and New Hampshire.

I talked about it with Ken Riley, president of the International Longshoremen’s Association’s Local 1422, which counts about 850 members, almost all of them black. The union has endorsed Clinton, and Riley supports her.

“I have lived in the South all my life,” Riley told me, “and I struggle every day against the establishment. I like Bernie and the lofty goals he’s laying out, but how realistic are they? Tell me how, what bills you’re gonna pass with this Congress? Hillary is a leftist tempered by reality. I like her connections on both sides of the aisle.”

Riley fears that if Sanders wins and tries to push his idea of a single-payer health-insurance system, that will only open up the health-care issue to Republican interference. “I have a 23-year-old son who is covered by my policy thanks to ObamaCare,” Riley said.

Yet Riley isn’t a Clinton fan in the way Sanders’ supporters are fans. “I’m not feeling the movement, not even seeing any signs or anything,” he complains.

I can’t help thinking that had Sanders been more active in the South before, he could have broken through the skepticism of important African-American leaders such as Riley.

As it is, his effort is impressive but it probably comes too late both for South Carolina and for the Southern states that will vote on Super Tuesday, March 1.

Clinton’s superior preparation counts for more here than it did in the first two states. African-American voters’ experience has taught them that it’s harder to get things done than to break things. They want a president who can make progress.

© 2016, Bloomberg View