Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C. (Photo: Andrew P. Scott, USAT)

WASHINGTON – Congress voted this week to approve legislation by Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina that would shield mid-size businesses from higher health insurance premiums.

The Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employees Act passed the House and Senate by voice vote and is expected to be signed by President Obama. It was a rare bipartisan agreement to modify the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Under the measure, businesses employing between 51 and 100 workers could be classified as large employers and avoid tough new regulations -- to take effect in January -- on small employers.

Scott, who sponsored the Senate version of the bill, said the change allows such companies to avoid health insurance premium increases of about 18 percent.

“They’ll have more money for raises, more money for bonuses and hopefully more money to hire people,” Scott said Friday.

It will be the first bill Scott has sponsored to become law since he joined the U.S. Senate in January 2013.

The legislation was favored by business and insurance groups, which said that without the change, mid-size businesses would have had to meet new mandates on benefits and rating rules, which would have driven premiums up.

Although Congress passed the legislation with little debate, there was some opposition from advocates for businesses with fewer than 50 employees, who were eager to have firms with 51-100 employees join the small group insurance market.

“Expanding the small group market next year will increase the size of the insurance pool, which benefits the healthcare system overall,” the Small Business Majority said in a letter to Congress opposing the legislation.

The bill’s Democratic co-sponsor, Sen. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, called it a helpful adjustment to the Affordable Care Act that still allows states to determine what is best for their insurance markets.

“This bill is a win for businesses across the country (and) a win for bipartisanship,” she said.

Scott said he still supports a full repeal of the Affordable Care Act, but since Obama would never sign such legislation, he’s willing to work on altering the five-year-old law where possible.

“This is absolutely a step to dismantle higher premiums,” Scott said.

Contact Mary Troyan at mtroyan@usatoday.com

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1L9eYfx