Cheyenne chiefs presented the list of leaders that lost their lives 150 years ago at Sand Creek. Their message was one of healing, not of revenge. ( Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

If you go The Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site is located east of Eads and north of Chivington. From Colo. 96, County Road 54 north leads to the site — about seven miles. The site is open three days a week. Refer to their web site for the hours of operation.

On Nov. 29, members of the Cheyenne Nation gathered at the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site for a time of healing with private services on "The Hill."

The significance of The Hill is that this was where the brutal attack under the command of Col. John Chivington began 150 years ago with troops firing into the tepees as the Cheyenne and Arapaho fled for their lives. At the time, it was a peaceful encampment with promises that they would be safe on this vast expanse of windswept, dry prairie — void of trees except those in the Sand Creek riverbed.

Colorado Territorial Gov. John Evans stated, "All citizens of Colorado ... go in pursuit, kill and destroy all hostile Indians that infest the Plains ..." Methodist minister Chivington carried this to the extreme. Helpless women and children were slaughtered and if this were not enough, their bodies were mutilated by soldiers as Chivington watched.

Capt Silas S. Soule disobeyed direct orders refusing to fire on the Cheyenne and Arapaho. After the massacre, he wrote his commanding officer, "I tell you Ned (Wynkoop), it was hard to see little children on their knees have their brains beat out by men professing to be civilized."

Capt. Cramer was the second officer to refuse to fire on the encampment. Both of these men are held in high esteem by the Cheyenne.

Advertisement

It is hard to say how many were killed at Sand Creek. Some nine soldiers died in the conflict, but the vast majority was helpless women, children and the elderly — about 150 noncombatants. Another 200 were wounded with many perishing after the attack.

The day's events this year at Sand Creek were emotional and vivid. An estimated 300 gathered to hear Park Ranger Jeff Campbell give an account leading up to the Sand Creek Massacre, the massacre itself and its aftermath. Park Ranger Craig Moore followed with an extensive list of "Sand Creek people" — those that survived and those that were killed.

Park Ranger Jeff Campbell spoke to a crowd of about 300 on Nov. 29 about the Sand Creek Massacre. His talk included the events leading up to the slaughter of women, children and the elderly. (Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

The Hill was opened to the public at 1 p.m. followed by Dr. David Halaas, former Colorado State Historian. He introduced Byron Strom who read the letter by Silas Soule. Its contents are so graphic that it was uncomfortable for the audience including those that were familiar with the subject.

The Cheyenne chiefs took over reading the names of the leaders killed in the conflict followed by a long chant. Cheyenne in the audience joined in with certain passages repeated again and again. The Cheyenne seemed pleased with those that made the journey to honor them and their ancestors gunned down so long ago. Their message was one of healing rather than revenge.

So what does all of this mean today? Without question, it was the darkest day in Colorado history.

The memory of Sand Creek, much like the Holocaust, needs to be kept alive in hopes that something like this will never happen again.

But the controversy rages on with contemporary Indian War historians claiming that these were hostile Indians and that their slaughter, no matter how brutal, was justified.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.