Earlier this month President Barack Obama advocated for Louisiana to invest in its people by accepting federal dollars -- our tax dollars that we've already sent to Washington -- for expanded access to Medicaid health insurance. As he has done on many occasions, Gov. Bobby Jindal rejected this offer of help for Louisiana, claiming the president was attempting to "bully Louisiana into accepting an expansion of Obamacare."

First of all, the president wasn't talking about an "expansion of Obamacare." He was talking about expanding access to Medicaid health insurance, a program that President Ronald Reagan chose to expand on several occasions.

Furthermore, since when is it "bullying" to plead for elected officials to do the right thing and care for their citizens?

Certainly, President Obama didn't "bully" Chris Christie into accepting Medicaid expansion for the people of New Jersey. The new chair of the Republican Governors Association was one of the first state leaders to embrace expanded access to Medicaid health insurance. In his state budget address, Christie said, "It's simple. We are putting people first. We have an opportunity to ensure that an even greater number of New Jerseyans who are at or near the poverty line will have access to critical health services beginning in January 2014."

The president didn't "bully" Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer, either. She took on members of her own party and worked with a bipartisan coalition in the Arizona Legislature to expand access to Medicaid health insurance. Some conservatives dubbed it "Obrewercare," but she persevered and won, telling those who voted in favor, "You put people before politics, and you stayed strong in the face of personal attacks."

These Republican governors -- who now include Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder, Ohio Gov. John Kasich and more -- who took Medicaid expansion weren't bullied. Some of them agreed with the moral argument, that it was the right thing to do for the uninsured. Others crunched the numbers and saw Medicaid expansion is the right thing to do for the taxpayers of their states.

Jindal claims that Medicaid expansion would cost Louisiana money, but he's dead wrong. If he had supported Medicaid expansion, it would've saved the state about $100 million this fiscal year. Now when I hear reports that the state's Medicaid program is in the hole for about $50 million, I shake my head. Meanwhile, Jindal's hospital privatization scheme is bringing in tens of millions less than promised and drawing ire from fellow Republicans. Medicaid expansion is probably the only thing that can save our failing health system, but Jindal won't hear of it. He believes merely discussing the topic is "bullying."

If Medicaid expansion is the right thing to do for the people of Louisiana and the right thing to do for our state budget, there's only one remaining reason to turn down these federal dollars -- politics. Even though Jindal has spent months out of state campaigning and wooing big-dollar donors, he occasionally returns to score political points off denying affordable health care to 240,000 uninsured Louisianians falling into the "Jindal gap." Politics was the foremost thing on Jindal's mind after the president's visit.

But Bobby Jindal's politics on Medicaid expansion are wrong, too. We saw last weekend a Republican candidate triumph in the 5th Congressional District special election after embracing Medicaid expansion. In a debate with his Republican opponent, Vance McAllister said Jindal was making the wrong choice for Louisiana in rejecting the federal Medicaid dollars. His opponent responded with advertisements that "a vote for Vance McAllister is a vote for Obamacare."

Despite -- or maybe because of -- his support for Medicaid expansion, McAllister won his election handily. Another supporter of Medicaid expansion, Virginia's Gov.-elect Terry McAuliffe, also handed Jindal and the RGA a stunning defeat this month. Medicaid expansion is looking more and more like a political winner.

My message for Gov. Jindal is this: Talking about important issues isn't bullying. It's politics. Perhaps Jindal should take his own advice to the GOP, put on his "big boy pants" and occasionally listen to opinions that differ from his own.

The only people who are truly being "bullied" are the hundreds of thousands of uninsured Louisianians who are being denied access to affordable health care by Bobby Jindal.

State Sen. Karen Carter Peterson, who represents the 5th District in New Orleans, is chairwoman of the Louisiana Democratic Party.