Topics: perceptual constancy, Scientific American, Innovation News, Working Ahead News, Technology News, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

Take a look at the red chips on the two Rubik cubes below. They are actually orange on the left and purple on the right, if you look at them in isolation. They only appear more or less equally red across the images because your brain is interpreting them as red chips lit by either yellow or blue light. This kind of misperception is an example of perceptual constancy, the mechanism that allows you to recognize an object as being the same in different environments, and under very diverse lighting conditions.



© BEAU LOTTO AND DALE PURVES



Constancy illusions are adaptive: consider what would have happened if your ancestors thought a friend became a foe whenever a cloud hid the sun, or if they lost track of their belongings–and even their own children—every time they stepped out of the cave and into the sunlight. Why, they might have even eaten their own kids! You are here because the perceptual systems of your predecessors were resistant to annoying changes in the physical reality–as is your own (adult) perception.

There are many indications that constancy effects must have helped us survive (and continue to do so). One such clue is that we are not born with perceptual constancy, but develop it many months after birth. So at first we see all differences, and then we learn to ignore certain types of differences so that we can recognize the same object as unchanging in many varied scenarios. When perceptual constancy arises, we lose the ability to detect multiple contradictions that are nevertheless highly noticeable to young babies.

Observe the three snail images below and choose the two that are most similar. The two glossy snails are virtually identical, right? Wrong! If a 4-month old infant could talk, she would tell you that you are crazy (well, she’d probably actually call you “cwazy”, or maybe “dummy poopypants”): clearly, the middle and right images are most alike!



COMPUTER-GENERATED RENDITIONS OF THE SAME 3D OBJECT. A AND B WERE RENDERED FROM DIFFERENT LIGHT FIELDS BUT LOOK SIMILAR. C LOOKS MATTE AND VERY DIFFERENT FROM B, BUT IN REALITY B AND C ARE CLOSER THAN A AND B. FROM YANG ET AL, CURRENT BIOLOGY, 2015.

The left and middle snails look nearly identical to you, but in reality are hugely dissimilar in terms of their pixel intensity. For babies it is a piece of cake to tell them apart. We adults instead have no trouble seeing that the middle and right snails are different, even though their physical discrepancy is much smaller than between the middle and left snails. In a study published last December in Current Biology, a team of psychologists led by Jiale Yang, of Chuo University in Japan, found the exact opposite for infants of up to 3-4 months of age.