(WFLA) – An underemployed Florida State University grad is selling her college diploma on eBay for $50,000 to cover $40,000 in college debt.

“Why waste four years of your life going to a state school for a piece of paper when you can just buy mine? I graduated from Florida State University in 2011 and have yet to use my diploma, so save yourself the time and buy college experience featuring diploma!” wrote Ritter in the eBay listing.

Ritter graduated in 2011 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Theatre. The eBay listing shows a photo of a woman posing with the diploma, which Ritter says is in mint condition.

The FSU grad says if you fork out 50 grand to make the diploma your own, you will get much more than just a piece of paper. The diploma also comes with a Florida State University experience, which includes-

“A TOUR of Florida State University including everywhere you would have gone/eaten/partied in your four years at FSU. (Possibly includes but not limited to: Suwanee Hall and a possible Ms. Killings sighting, Jimmy Johns, Mr. Roboto, dinner at Cool Beanz, burgers & beers at Monks, drinks at Poor Pauls) Access to all of my college memories/Facebook albums for 6 months! (access to any memories by phone or text between 10-7 Sunday-Thursday so you can give someone the most authentic specific memories straight from my brain to their ears) A show (on me) at the FSU School of Theatre (on opening night if time permits!) I will rent a car and show you the best view of the capitol building A walking tour of the theatre where I performed How I Learned to Drive. A driving tour of the spots I got speeding tickets in between classes! A very quick drive by my former drug dealer/yoga teachers house so as not to arouse suspicion. **A TOUR OF ALL OF MY FAVORITE PUBLIXES INCLUDING SWEET TEA AT EACH LOCATION!!** A walking tour of all the trash cans my ex silently projectile vomited in on our way to big events.<3 IF timing permits, AN AUTHENTIC FSU HOME FOOTBALL OR BASEBALL GAME!”

Ritter says she is selling the diploma for the actual cost of her 4-year education which paid for 3.5 years tuition at Florida State University, half year tuition at Theatre Academy London (FSU’s study abroad program), one year room/board in Smith Hall, four years access to home football games, four years access to insurance pre-Obamacare, four years woth of books, and four years in memories.

Ritter ended the eBay post with the following message:

“Seriously though, I’m still $40,000 in debt and I work as a personal assistant in Los Angeles. Someone please buy my experience (diploma) and validate my use of time between 2007-2011.”

If you are interested in purchasing Stephanie Ritter’s diploma, you have until 4pm (PST) on September 23 to do so.