Q: My insurance agent says I have to renew my health plan immediately or I’ll face much higher premiums because of Obamacare. He’s pressuring me. What should I do?

A: Don’t sign anything until you check on what’s being offered on the Obamacare public exchanges, which opened for business in every state and the District of Columbia last week and will continue enrolling members until March 31 of next year.

With several exchanges off to rocky starts due to computer breakdowns and overwhelming traffic, some agents may see an opportunity to take advantage of the confusion surrounding Obamacare before exchange staffers are readily available to answer your questions. Your agent may be pressuring you to renew your individual health plan because he knows two things you ought to know—and may eventually learn on your exchange.

First, some rival plans on your state exchange may be better than what you have now. All “qualified” Obamacare health plans offer extensive benefits, including maternity, prescriptions, mental health treatment and more.

Generally, subsidized exchange plans are at least as good as many company-sponsored plans and far superior to virtually all individual plans on the market today.

Second, you and your family may qualify for sizable federal subsidies to help you pay for an exchange plan’s premiums. Experts estimate that about 80 percent of individuals who buy their own health insurance on the exchange will qualify for subsidies—including individuals making up to $47,000 and families of four earning up to $94,000 a year.

Here are three falsehoods you may hear in the coming weeks as Obamacare is rolled out on your state’s exchange:

You must renew your health plan with us right away. While insurers and companies can set their own deadlines for enrolling in their plans, you have until March 31 to enroll in an Obamacare plan for 2014 on your state exchange. That should give you plenty of time to compare insurance policies and make an informed choice.

Your premium is going to skyrocket. Most of the scary stories about premiums skyrocketing under Obamacare are quoting prices before subsidies. And those federal subsidies are massive. The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that, on average, subsidies will slash monthly premiums by 67 percent.

The subsidies can amount to around a thousand of dollars or more a month, according to Families USA, a leading consumer advocacy organization. It will be possible, for example, for a family of four earning $40,000 and paying $1,000 a month today to see their premiums cut to around $165 after subsidies. Contact your exchange through HealthCare.gov or call the Health Insurance Marketplace at 800-318-2596 and find out if you’re eligible for subsidies, or perhaps qualify for Medicaid or the Children’s Health Insurance Program for your children under 19.

You can trust what I say because I’m from a big-name insurance company. Generally, you can, but not always. For example, the Kentucky Department of Insurance recently fined giant Humana for “misleading” 6,500 existing customers with a marketing letter that failed to mention that some of them might be eligible for subsidies to buy rival insurance on the exchanges.

Kentucky’s insurance commissioner Sharon P. Clark told the Wall Street Journal: “This letter was preying on people’s lack of knowledge about their consumer protections, their rights.”

And in another example, Arizona’s Department of Insurance recently rejected one of Aetna’s advertising brochures touting a “one-time opportunity” for savings with an Aetna plan. The ad read: “Health Care Reform is here. Higher rates can wait.”