One of the more bizarre talking points in the Obamasphere is the attempt to somehow blame Congress for Obama's failure to vigorously fight ISIS because Congress hasn't "declared war" on ISIS.

This talking point is a ridiculous joke because...

1. Obama has said that he doesn't need the authorization

2. Obama, like Bush, has full authority to fight Islamic terrorists based on the post 9/11 Authorization. After some hemming and hawing, Obama's people admitted they were using the 9/11 AUMF.

3. Obama went to war in Libya with no authorization from Congress and against the opposition of a majority of Congress and the American people. Obama has never allowed Congress to tell him what to do. If he wanted to carpet bomb every inch of Iraq and Syria, he would do it no matter what Congress says. He has already illegally fought a war without Congressional authorization, implemented illegal alien amnesty without Congressional authorization, and then there's ObamaCare, the EPA's mandates over everything, as a few examples.

4. Obama played a long complicated game with Congress over the ISIS declaration of war. As a sample of this crazy ISIS AUMF gaslighting, Obama Inc. refused to tell the Senate what kind of authorization it wanted. Then it began putting out authorization proposals that would abolish previous authorizations to fight terrorists, including the 9/11 AUMF. This sounds like bureaucratic nonsense, but it boils down to Obama trying to shift the blame to Congress for what he wasn't doing while refusing to actually let Congress authorize a war against ISIS.

But the talking point has slowly trickled down from the leftysphere to the mediasphere with the New York Times penning an editorial blasting Congress for not giving Obama what he doesn't want.

"A Fearful Congress Sits Out the War Against ISIS," the New York Times scolds. That would be a war in which Congress has no say and which Obama drops leaflets 45 minutes before to warn ISIS he's going to bomb them.

Then the Times discovers that suddenly presidential overreach is a problem. "But by abdicating one of their most important responsibilities under the Constitution, which gives Congress the exclusive right to declare war, lawmakers are unwisely emboldening the executive branch to overstep its powers."

Except Obama has been pursuing military operations for a long time without asking Congress. So why isn't the Times penning an editorial attacking Obama for abuse of power? Because like Obama, the Times editorial board is just trolling.

"By failing to debate and approve an authorization of war, Congress is sidestepping a set of critical questions it has a duty to address, including the precise goals of the campaign in Syria and whether the current strategy appears likely to achieve them," the Times blathers.

Except that Obama will not allow Congress to do these things. So the New York Times is attacking Congress for not exercising powers that Obama won't let them exercise, but isn't attacking Obama for it.

That's like blaming the mugging victim while praising the mugger.

We have a whole editorial in which the Times blames Congress, not Obama, for Obama's abuses of power. This is just a new level of cynicism even for the New York Times.