Justin Motlow says that he’s just happy to be playing football, but the 5-foot-11, 182-pound freshman wide receiver’s humility makes his accomplishment that much sweeter.

This season, Motlow, who is from Tampa, will suit up as a Florida State University Seminole. An interesting acquisition for the team, because he will be the first tribal member to carry the team’s namesake on his uniform.

“It feels surreal,” Motlow told The Seminole Tribune.“I never imagined I’d be able to play here. I’m going to make the most of my opportunity and keep working.”

FSU head coach Jimbo Fisher said Motlow’s Native heritage is truly meaningful for the team and the school. “We just want to represent the Seminole family for all they have done for us,” Fisher said. “It’s a great honor to have a family member wear that helmet.”

Motlow’s grandmother is 100-percent Seminole and Motlow is one-fourth Seminole. “I’ve always loved FSU and they are a great program,” he told Yahoo News. “But to be able to have a chance to represent the Nation, that’s an extreme honor.”

RELATED:The 10 Best Twitter Comments About FSU's New Logo

RELATED:ESPN Has ‘No Comment' on Its College GameDay 'Minstrel Show'

At Tampa Catholic High School, Motlow was the Crusader’s 2013 offensive player of the year and had 1,000 yards receiving as a senior. Now at FSU, Motlow said that he has to train twice as hard to keep up with his teammates, but his coaches are taking notice.

“I like what I see,” said Lawrence Dawsey, FSU’s co-offensive coordinator coach. “Justin has good ball skills. He can run good routes and can catch the ball. He will be a good football player, but his head is spinning with the new offense and the tempo. But he’s eager to learn, and not backing down.”

Motlow came to FSU as a walk-on, so he won’t travel with the team, but he will suit up at home games. "I just want to play football and get a great education," Motlow said to FlaVarsity.com. "I feel very blessed to have the chance to do bott – if it works out."