DENVER — Seeking to head off a costly election-year fight over oil and gas drilling that could threaten vulnerable Colorado Democrats, Gov. John W. Hickenlooper said Monday that he had reached a deal to keep two antifracking measures off November’s ballots.

The fight over fracking in a swing state that prizes its natural beauty and relies on its energy resources for jobs and tax revenues has become a monthslong headache for Democratic leaders, opening fissures within the party and between pro-energy moderates and environmental groups that want to impose tough limits on the oil and gas rigs sprouting up alongside subdivisions.

Under the agreement announced Monday, Representative Jared Polis, a millionaire Democrat who has been a leading backer of a campaign to limit drilling, said he would pull his support for two measures that would have prohibited drilling within 2,000 feet of homes and given communities the power to pass tough new rules on energy development in their backyards — a power now claimed by the state.

In exchange, the state would create an 18-person task force to study the effects of drilling near homes and schools, with several members drawn from affected communities. The state would also drop a 2012 lawsuit filed against a Northern Colorado city, Longmont, that had crafted its own restrictive oil and gas rules.

“This is the way we do things in Colorado,” Mr. Hickenlooper said at a news conference with Mr. Polis at the Capitol. “What we’re working on here could be a template for addressing this in the rest of the country.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Polis, who has faced pressure to drop the potentially divisive measures, called the agreement a “thoughtful path forward.”

The deal won quick praise from major energy trade groups and from Colorado’s two Democratic senators, including Mark Udall, who has faced Republican attacks on his energy positions as he runs in a tight race for re-election. But environmental groups assailed the agreement as a “secret deal” that would do little to keep new drilling rigs from rising near homes or schools.

Mr. Hickenlooper also called for supporters of two industry-backed ballot proposals to pull their measures off the table, which they did late on Monday. Earlier that day, supporters of a measure to financially penalize communities that restrict drilling had turned in boxes of signed petitions to the secretary of state’s office, a necessary step in moving their issue toward the ballot, and hinted that they might still move forward.

But by Monday night, two leading backers of the proposal to restrict oil and gas money from flowing to communities announced that they were withdrawing the initiative and suspending the campaign behind it. They called the end of the antifracking ballot effort a win for “responsible energy development” in the state.

“This is an exciting turn of events,” Representative Frank McNulty, a Republican from Highlands Ranch, south of Denver, said in a statement. “For months we’ve asked Polis to pull his initiatives in favor of a more constructive approach.”

If the agreement holds, it will defuse a multimillion-dollar ballot fight over hydraulic fracturing and the costs and benefits of the West’s oil boom.

That was shaping up to be a high-profile battle pitting energy and business groups against conservationists and community activists in one of the first-ever statewide votes on whether to tighten the rules on energy development.

While some fracking critics were eager for the fight, many moderate Democratic leaders worried that the measures would widen divisions among voters.