That well-known bastion of right wing nuttery - the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - has released data showing that US temps have not risen in the last decade and have, in fact, dropped.

That well-known bastion of right wing nuttery - the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - has released data showing that US temps have not risen in the last decade and have, in fact, dropped.

Responding to widespread criticism that its temperature station readings were corrupted by poor siting issues and suspect adjustments, NOAA established a network of 114 pristinely sited temperature stations spread out fairly uniformly throughout the United States. Because the network, known as the U.S. Climate Reference Network (USCRN), is so uniformly and pristinely situated, the temperature data require no adjustments to provide an accurate nationwide temperature record. USCRN began compiling temperature data in January 2005. Now, nearly a decade later, NOAA has finally made the USCRN temperature readings available. According to the USCRN temperature readings, U.S. temperatures are not rising at all – at least not since the network became operational 10 years ago. Instead, the United States has cooled by approximately 0.4 degrees Celsius, which is more than half of the claimed global warming of the twentieth century.

The decline in the US matches what we know about the temperature stagnation occurring all over the planet for the last 17 years:

Second, for those who may point out U.S. temperatures do not equate to global temperatures, the USCRN data are entirely consistent with – and indeed lend additional evidentiary support for – the global warming stagnation of the past 17-plus years. While objective temperature data show there has been no global warming since sometime last century, the USCRN data confirm this ongoing stagnation in the United States, also. Third, the USCRN data debunk claims that rising U.S. temperatures caused wildfires, droughts, or other extreme weather events during the past year. The objective data show droughts, wildfires, and other extreme weather events have become less frequent and severe in recent decades as our planet modestly warms. But even ignoring such objective data, it is difficult to claim global warming is causing recent U.S. droughts and wildfires when U.S. temperatures are a full 0.4 degrees Celsius colder than they were in 2005. Even more importantly than the facts above, the USCRN provides the promise of reliable nationwide temperature data for years to come. No longer will global warming alarmists be able to hide behind thinly veiled excuses to doctor the U.S. temperature record. Now, thanks to the USCRN, the data are what the data are.

It should go without saying that this data will change no one's mind or deter the administration from trying to implement their CO2 policies anyway. They ignore inconvenient facts and spout their hysteria anyway. In that sense, it doesn't matter what the science is. Politics is driving this debate now and the goal will be to marginalize skeptics with ridicule and name calling.

Editor Lifson will be attending the Climate Change Conference sponsored by the Heartland Institute in Las Vegas this week. Be sure to watch for his blog posts about what's happening in the skeptical world.