Several friends and family members of a man who was shot and killed Saturday afternoon on James Island gathered Sunday night in West Ashley to mourn his loss and share their stories about him.

Authorities have identified the 43-year-old man as Irvin Green, of James Island. He died of a gunshot wound, Charleston County Deputy Coroner Kimberly Rhoton said Sunday.

The shooting happened about 5 p.m. on Honeyhill Road, which is located off Fort Johnson Road, but few details have since been released. The Charleston County Sheriff's Office is investigating the shooting.

"It's still the shock phase of everything," said Ebony Green, Irvin Green's sister. "It helps (to have everyone together) because we all share stories about him - we laugh, we share, we cry - I think it makes it just a little easier."

She was emotional as she sat in one of the rooms of her parents' house and described her brother.

"The biggest thing that comes to my mind - he's a giver," she said. "He was always trying to keep everyone happy and he loved spending time with his children."

She said he had six children and was a family man who loved to cook and do things for others. She added that she and her brother were very close.

"That's my best friend," Ebony Green said, covering her face as she teared up. "If you ever fell short of anything, he was there, all you had to do was ask."

Irvin Green wasn't married, but had been dating Yolanda Chisolm for about eight months at the time of his death. She described him as a gentleman who was always helping other people, and said they had known each other for about 10 years before they began dating.

"He was a pleaser and a provider and he was compassionate about other people's feelings," Chisolm said, recalling having to get off the phone with him once because he was helping a stranded motorist on the side of the road. "Everybody knows that he is going to be dearly and greatly missed."

She said that Irvin Green was "going all out" this year to get his children and nieces and nephews whatever they wanted for Christmas, no matter how big or small.

Angela Smalls, the mother of one of Green's children, called him a "wonderful father," who was very dependable.

"It's hard," she said of the loss.

Shawn Walker said Green treated his nieces and nephews like his own children. She is the mother of one of his nieces, who was to receive a dirt bike from him this Christmas.

"Her dad is not here," Walker explained, "So she really looks up to him."

She said she considered Green a brother and was having a hard time coming to terms with his death.

"It's like I'm numb to the situation, because it's not like it's real," she said. "He never did anything to anyone, so it's hard to think about that happening to such a good person."

Chisolm and Ebony Green said they didn't know what happened leading up to the shooting, but they know who the shooter is and said he knew Irvin Green. They didn't identify how the two knew each other.

"With the events, the police should have been swarming the area," Chisolm said of the place where the shooting occurred.

She expressed concern that there has not yet been an arrest in the case and described the suspect, whom she did not name, as dangerous.

"When you murder a man in the presence of his child and children, you are a sick, demented person," she said. "He is a coward, he is a menace to society that lacks responsibility and does not regard human life."

Ebony Green said her family is hopeful for an arrest and still wants to know more information.

"We're hoping the police, as they do their investigation, will shed more light into what happened," she said.

Anyone with information about the shooting can contact Crime Stoppers at 554-1111.

Andy Paras contributed to this report.