WASHINGTON, D.C. – Two kinds of people want to know what health insurance will cost in the new marketplace. The first kind lack insurance now.

The second is everyone else. Even if you get insurance through the workplace, you're probably curious as to what it would cost to buy an individual policy on the Affordable Care Act marketplace, or exchange.

Would your premiums be higher or lower than they are now? Might your income qualify you for a federal subsidy?

It has been hard until now for most people to find out with any kind of precision, but that is starting to change, and we'll provide some tools here so you can run your own calculations.

We'll start with the federal government's website, Healthcare.gov. It has a major weakness, and we don't mean the computer glitches that fouled up would-be buyers. Unless you actually register and start enrolling -- you might succeed at enrolling, you might not, and the White House as well as outsiders say it's getting better – you can only get rough estimates when window shopping.

Some of the estimates are wrong, too, as we found when running a variety of scenarios.

The biggest problem is that when estimating premiums for the casual shopper (as opposed to the actual buyer), the Healthcare.gov calculator does not make enough distinctions for age. It also does not factor in your income or whether you are a smoker. Your income will determine whether you qualify for tax subsidies to offset the cost of premiums. Your age and smoking status will make a difference in the size of those premiums. Although the ACA, also known as Obamacare, limits the role that age and, to a lesser extent, smoking may play when an insurer sets premiums, it does not outlaw them entirely.

Healthcare.gov also tells you almost nothing about the insurance you are perusing, other than the name of the insurance policies. It includes no links to tell you about deductibles, co-payments, provider networks (is your doctor in the plan?) and so on. And it gives estimates for some policies for which you might not even qualify.

For example, the ACA allows insurers to sell bare-bones, catastrophic-coverage policies to only a small group, primarily those under age 30. Yet when we used HealthCare.gov to estimate the costs of coverage for other age groups, the first thing that appeared were costs for – wait for it – catastrophic coverage.

Until recently, Healthcare.gov nevertheless was one of the best estimating sites available. It isn't now. You still can go to the site to actually buy a policy, and at that point – after you have provided personal information – you can get accurate rates. But this is not the best website to use if you are merely browsing, but not buying.

Health Sherpa, on the other hand, is impressive for getting good estimates – actually, make that accurate prices, not just estimates, in most cases. This site was developed by three programmers in San Francisco as a free service after they saw the frustration created by Heathcare.gov.

Like Healthcare.gov, HealthSherpa.com wants to know where you live, because the ACA allows insurers to set prices based on the difference in health care costs by region, even within individual states. But Health Sherpa also asks for specific ages, not just ranges, and incomes. It then will spit out results that include your subsidy and your monthly cost for every single policy you can buy on the exchange. It is complete.

It even has buttons telling you how to buy each policy, with phone numbers and links to the individual insurers. Note what it does not do: send you to the government's website. The ACA allows you to buy directly from the insurer if you wish. Under law, the price should not be any different, authorities say.

But like all estimators, Health Sherpa is not perfect. It asks if you smoke, yet that made no difference in the prices that Health Sherpa gave us when we tested it out. We first noticed this when comparing Health Sherpa with another non-government site, and we asked George Kalogeropoulos, one of the Health Sherpa founders, about it. He said that he and his partners got their data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and HHS has had difficulty with the smoking issue.

That might seem odd, since the ACA allows insurers to charge extra for smokers – up to 50 percent more -- because they tend to use more health care, particularly as they age. But as we determined from talking with Kalogeropoulos and others, many insurers don't actually charge that full amount. Some states such as California, New York and Vermont forbid charging smokers extra, because they regard smoking as a pre-existing condition.



There doesn't appear to be a good public database for independent outfits like Health Sherpa to tap into in order to discern each state's and insurer's determination on smoking.

The information certainly is available on the exchange -- if you are buying and not merely browsing. Actual enrollees, as opposed to those of us driving by, learn of the tobacco surcharge when they sign up, said Tyler Davis, outreach coordinator for the Ohio Association of Foodbanks, which is helping low-income Ohioans enroll. The information just isn't available to everyone else. An HHS training video, which HHS sent The Plain Dealer, shows that the tobacco-use question is asked fairly late in the process, and only after an applicant has already provided considerable personal information including income and Social Security number.

Health Sherpa's other shortfall is that while it tells you the names and prices of policies, it provides no other details about them. There are hints in the names --- you can discern that a Market HSA 6000 bronze plan, offered by Medical Mutual of Ohio, for example, involves a health savings account paired with a $6,000 deductible policy. But there's a lot more to know – maybe you'd prefer a Kaiser Permanente KP Bronze 4500/50, if that's not Greek to you -- before deciding on one or another policy in the same price range. Even the deductibles have some exclusions because of the ACA's preventive-care requirements.

Still, Health Sherpa can start you on your way, and refer you to the insurers' websites for policy details.

The Kaiser Family Foundation also has a calculator that takes into account your location, family size and income before arriving at the size of your subsidy. It appears to be the most widely used subsidy estimator around.

But it does not provide names of insurers or details on their policies.

This is a good calculator to use, though, for estimating roughly how much you'd pay for a policy after the subsidy – information that is hardly complete but that can get you started when you then turn to other websites.

Kaiser's estimator also asks if you smoke, but Kaiser has run into the same difficulty there as Health Sherpa. Kaiser's calculator initially used the ACA maximum surcharge, or 50 percent, to estimate how much more smokers would pay, but then decided that it was not accurate or fair across all states.

"Typical surcharges were more like 20 percent and some plans didn't have any surcharge," Kaiser Family Foundation spokesman Chris Lee said in an email. "Now the calculator is programmed to show a warning to smokers that their premiums could be higher than shown in the calculator."

For a more basic calculator, you can use the simple one made available by Medical Mutual of Ohio. A similar one is available from Akron-based SummaCare. Both merely show the subsidy you might have available, based on income and family size. You'll have to do more (or use one of these other sites) if you want to know about premiums and policies.

None of these tools, it seems, tells you everything you need to know to buy a policy. If you are serious about buying, it is probably wise to visit Healthcare.gov, register and be as specific as possible. You'll reach a stage where the government computers want to automatically check private financial and identity information. That's where we stopped when checking it out, because we were neither buying nor wishing to misrepresent ourselves when testing results for a variety of make-believe scenarios. Only by providing personal information can a buyer get the full panoply of premiums, subsidies and plan details on the government website.

We did, however, find a website that had nearly all the features we wanted: eHealthInsurance.com. It gave us actual premiums and subsidies, without making us sign up to buy. It even gave us smokers' rates.

It could do that because eHealth is an online brokerage and, rather than having to estimate a huge range of state rules and insurance carriers' procedures, it has "relationships with certain carriers," said Brian Mast, vice president for communications. "This is information they are giving us."

The site's shortcoming is that, as a broker, eHealth deals only with specific carriers. In Northeast Ohio, eHealth's ACA policies come from Kaiser Foundation Health Plans and Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield. Other carriers are available, but not with ACA subsidies.

Yet there are five additional, subsidy-eligible insurers in the Obamacare market in Northeast Ohio: Medical Mutual, SummaCare, HealthSpan, CareSource and Molina Marketplace. Incidentally, whether you buy on Healthcare.gov, from a broker or brokerage site or directly from an insurer or its website, the price for the same policy should not be different. Other than the smoking issue, we found consistency across these platforms when examining prices for the same policies.

The ACA is supposed to make buying insurance easier. That may be, but just browsing the aisles before buying is rarely a one-stop excursion. Try out these estimating tools, using the links we provided. Compare the rates against what you pay now for similar coverage. And don't forget to check out the localized premium estimating tool that our colleague Rich Exner developed, using data from Healthcare.gov. The Healthcare.gov family and age breakdowns for estimates are general, but Rich's piece will tell you more about how the subsidies work -- and about the metal-coded system (bronze, silver, gold, platinum) around which Obamacare plans are based.

Then come back and tell us about the results.