Greentree Development Group’s Brookland at Lakepointe condominiums in Hopatcong will hold a grand opening on Sept. 13. (Photo: Rendering courtesy of Greentree Development Group)

Morris Chamber to hold seminar on Obamacare

FLORHAM PARK: The Morris County Chamber of Commerce will host a seminar titled “Navigating through the Affordable Care Act” with local health care experts.

The seminar is scheduled to be held at the chamber’s offices at 325 Columbia Tpke., Suite 101, in Florham Park, from 8 to 9:30 a.m. A panel discussion will feature Roy Pranpat of Health Benefits Navigator, Aida Visakay of AxisPointe Employee Benefits Advisors; and Laura Hingle of AXA Advisors.

These local experts will discuss topics including:

Compliance issues with small groups that prevent them from getting group health insurance and innovative ways to work around these issues;

Methods of repositioning employee health benefits to effectively reduce overall costs;

Innovative methods of providing health insurance benefits to employees;

Gap insurance products as a solution to minimize the adverse effect of high deductible plans; and

Reporting requirement and penalties.

The seminar is open to members of the Morris County Chamber of Commerce and non-members alike. The cost is $25 for members and $45 for non-members. To register visit http://www.morrischamber.org/ and go to the Events Calendar or email events@morrischamber.org.

Condo development to hold open house

HOPATCONG: Greentree Development Group’s Brookland at Lakepointe condominiums will hold a grand opening on Sept. 13.

Working with Greentree Development, Hopatcong is creating a year-round pedestrian-friendly neighborhood that will include homes and a Main Street with retail spaces and restaurants against the backdrop of Lake Hopatcong, according to a press release from the developer.

Brookland will have about 4,500 square feet of retail space and a one-bedroom home on the first floor. On the second two floors are 14 two-bedroom homes. All homes here have nine-foot ceilings, two bedrooms, spacious kitchens and bright sunny rooms, the release said.

With garages for some homes on the ground floor, a private stairway takes owners home to one of the three floorplans, ranging in size from about 950 square feet to just under 1,300 square feet.

Surrounded by a cove and rolling hills on one side and Lake Hopatcong on the other, Brookland is built with stone and stucco accents and maintenance-free vinyl siding. Kitchens feature granite countertops, stainless steel undermount sinks, lever faucets with pull-out sprayers and stainless steel GE appliances, including gas range, microwave and dishwasher, the release said.

More information is available at www.greentreedevelopmentgroup.com or by calling at 973-670-9024 or 973-267-8990, ext. 120.

Read or Share this story: http://dailyre.co/1EAftyn