A Maury County Sheriff’s deputy helped an elderly woman leave her burning house and kept the fire at bay until firefighters arrived on the scene.

Deputy Sam Shelby told The Daily Herald he was patrolling in the area of Lawrenceburg Highway on Thursday when a call came over the radio about a house fire.

“I was only about a mile away from the house, so I went over there,” said Shelby, who was the first responder to arrive on the scene. “When I got there, I saw a lady standing in the doorway, and she was pretty hysterical.”

Shelby said the woman did not want to leave her cats in the burning house, but he said he was able to convince her to go outside for her own safety.

He said he then entered the home, where he saw a wood burning stove in the center of the living room with a pipe running through the ceiling to the roof, he said.

“I could see the flames lick the ceiling and I thought, ‘Maybe if I can put out the fire I can see, I can hold it together until the fire department gets here,”’ Shelby said.

He then went back outside and removed a fire extinguisher from the trunk of his patrol car before going back inside the house and was extinguishing some of the flames when the Maury County Rural Fire Department arrived, he said.

“The fire department got there quickly and saved the house,” Shelby said. “We all work together.”

Shelby, who will celebrate his sixth anniversary with the sheriff’s department in February, said this is the second blaze he’s helped extinguish while on duty. The first one occurred a few years ago and was an axle on a tractor trailer that caught fire, he said.

◆◆◆

An employee of Columbia State Community College’s bookstore is facing charges of theft involving embezzlement, according to a Columbia Police Department report.

Timothy Bruce Puchner, the bookstore manager, was accused by Barnes &Noble representatives of taking over $2,000 from the store over the past year, the report stated.

Osbey Orozco of Barnes &Noble, who owns the college bookstore, told officers Puchner took a total of $2,183 from the cash register, “claiming to have bought back college books with the money but taking it for personal use.”

Orozco then allegedly gave officers a written statement from Puchner saying that he did commit the thefts, some of which dated back to December 2013, according to the report.

Puchner, 36, of 2572 Music Valley Drive, Nashville, allegedly admitted to officers that he did write the statement and he did commit the thefts.

Puchner was transported to the Maury County Jail, where he was jailed and released Thursday on $4,000 bond, according to a booking report from the jail.

◆◆◆

The Maury County Sheriff’s Department will conduct a sobriety checkpoint Friday night, according to an MCSD press release.

Beginning at 10 p.m. Friday, Dec. 19, deputies will check for drivers who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs. The checkpoint will be on Highway 50, .2 miles east of the 19.9 mile marker, the release stated.

◆◆◆

An incident at Doogal’s Deli Friday night left two injured and one man facing two counts of aggravated assault, according to a Columbia Police report.

Nicholas Brooks Moulton, 28, was arrested and charged in the incident and remained in Maury County Jail in lieu of a $4,000 bond.

According to the report, officers responded to a fight-in-progress call involving 10 to 15 people. Upon arrival, Moulton had been detained, but the victims, Glen Nelson and Steven O’Toole, received injuries to the head as a result of an extendable baton Moulton had used.

Witnesses said they had seen Moulton swinging the baton “carelessly” and “like a bat” in the parking lot, and had struck Nelson in the head. They then observed Moulton pull the baton backwards and accidentally hit O’Toole in the side of the head, according to witness reports.

Moulton stated he and O’Toole had just arrived and he had gone inside Doogal’s Deli while O’Toole stayed outside. Moulten said when he walked outside, he saw O’Toole on the ground, injured and he had not seen what had happened and hadn’t assaulted anyone, according to the report.

Moulten is currently on parole for aggravated burglary.