By Jason Hart | Watchdog.org

A new high school graduation requirement backed by the National Education Association could cost taxpayers billions.

In thousands of districts throughout the country, the teachers union’s push to make high school students take an “ethnic studies” course could mean additional staffing costs — and more dues-paying members for NEA.

That’s the case in Los Angeles, where the city school district initially projected the new requirement would cost $4 million. After a few months of planning, the district now expects ethnic studies will cost $73 million to implement.

“A major portion of the latest $73 million estimate is needed for teaching staff,” 89.3 KPCC reported in May.

NEA wants the Los Angeles ethnic studies requirement to serve as a model nationwide, as the union spelled out July 5 during its annual meeting.

Learn how to make Ethnic Studies a graduation requirement in every school: http://t.co/ktdpycefLU @JoseDelBarrio #NEARA15 — NEA (@NEAToday) July 5, 2015

Jose Lara, a California teacher, school board member and local NEA officer, received NEA’s Social Justice Activist Award for promoting ethnic studies in Los Angeles Unified School District and throughout California.

LAUSD has offered elective ethnic studies courses since the 1990s. Lara and activist group Ethnic Studies Now are supporting a California bill meant to follow the Los Angeles trajectory statewide.

Before the latest round of amendments, California Assembly Bill 101 would have required every school district in the state to offer an ethnic studies course.

NEA failed to respond to questions about its Social Justice Activist Award, but ethnic studies has clearly been on the mind of union leadership for several years.

Included in the Ethnic Studies Now “toolkit” is an NEA paper from 2010 on “The Academic and Social Value of Ethnic Studies.”

“Rather than being divisive, ethnic studies helps students bridge differences that already exist in experiences and perspectives,” NEA asserted in a summary of the paper’s conclusions.

A 2010 NEA “strategy guide” for promoting ethnic studies focused on fighting an Arizona law to stop schools from teaching Mexican American studies and called for expanding ethnic studies elsewhere, as well.

Supporters say ethnic studies increase class participation and reduce dropout rates among minority students. But regardless of the costs, what works in L.A. city schools may not translate nationwide.

“The kinds of students we have vary greatly across the country — L.A. is certainly different than Cleveland, and Cleveland is certainly different than New York,” Fabio Rojas, an associate professor of sociology at Indiana University, told Watchdog.org.

“We would expect the content of the curriculum to be a little bit different across the country,” he added.

Rojas said although there’s “an element of truth” to complaints that high school course materials “overlook or under-emphasize the contributions of various ethnic minorities,” that doesn’t mean a semester-long ethnic studies course is a good idea in every district.

In some states and school districts, it may make more sense to use “more inclusive” textbooks in traditional history and social studies classes, he said. Even when districts decide to offer standalone ethnic studies courses, they can often be taught by existing staff.

“In high school, there are a lot of ways to do it,” Rojas said. “There are a lot of options. You don’t have to go and hire 1,000 new people; maybe people can be retrained, or you could rewrite the history books.”

NEA itself offers reasons for skepticism about whether Lara’s vision of ethnic studies in every school would encourage racial unity or divisiveness.

In a heated speech at the same event where Lara received his Social Justice Activist Award, NEA executive director John Stocks fumed about “white privilege,” “income inequality” and other politically charged concerns.

Last year, the teachers union donated $15,000 to National Council of La Raza, a left-wing group demanding amnesty for illegal immigrants. NEA donated $50,000 each to illegal immigration advocacy groups Mi Familia Vota and National Immigration Law Center.

From 2008-13, NEA gave $220,000 to MSNBC host and notorious race-hustler Al Sharpton’s National Action Network.