The fire is believed to be human-caused. (Source: Northeastern Arizona Public Information System)

Firefighters have gained ground against a human-caused wildfire that is burning in the Apache-Sitgreaves forest near the rural Navajo County town of Aripine in northeastern Arizona.

The U.S. Forest Service said in a press release midday Tuesday the "Phoenix Fire" is about 30 percent contained. The flames have burned 592 acres, fire crews said. Firefighters on Monday used a bulldozer and burning operations to build a line around the fire.

Strong winds and dry conditions initially helped the fire grow when it started Sunday north of Highway 260, South of Highway 277 in the Phoenix Park Wash. The fire grew to 500 acres Monday.

There are 58 firefighters from local, state and forest service units on scene. That includes 2 hand crews, 4 engines, 1 water tender, 1 bulldozer.

The Forest Service said the fire's cause is under investigation but the Navajo County Sheriff's Office says it was started by target shooting.

The wind-driven fire is burning mostly grassy fuels in the old Rodeo-Chediski burn area.

The fires momentum slowed significantly overnight allowing a bulldozer to get a line around approximately two-thirds of the Phoenix fire.

The National Weather service said there is a 20 percent chance for precipitation Tuesday along with windy conditions.

Aripine is near Heber-Overgaard, about an hour east of Payson.

The Navajo County Sheriff’s Office said within the past 10 days residents in Navajo County have experienced three large human-caused fires.

With the absence of the El Nino, conditions are dry and the month of March is the start of the windy season.

The forest conditions are extraordinarily dry for this time of year.

Navajo County officials are asking everyone in the White Mountains to use caution when using fire to burn weeds, or other material.

People should be aware of the weather conditions as well as the dryness of the land. Sheriff Kelly "KC" Clark advised, "the difference between a controlled burn and a wild fire is 30 seconds.:

Phoenix fire- Lat 34.24.59 Long 110.28.12. Aprox 100 acres Multiple resources on scene. https://t.co/4xPnPEkVdC or 928-333-3412 for updates — ApacheSitgreaves NFs (@A_SNFs) March 7, 2016

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.

(The Associated Press contributed to this story.)