MONTPELIER — The state has been paying for work that hasn’t been performed and is at a high risk of missing key deadlines in the development of the state’s online health insurance exchange, according to a performance audit released Thursday by State Auditor Doug Hoffer.



The audit also indicates growing unease by the state’s largest health insurance carrier, Blue Cross Blue Shield, over billing discrepancies amounting to millions of dollars in unpaid premiums on the company’s ledger.



The myriad malfunctions and setbacks associated with Vermont Health Connect have been well-documented since its launch in October 2013. It still lacks key automated functions, and small businesses must still enroll offline through insurance carriers.



That is after nearly $200 million in federal money has been spent by the state on planning, developing and implementing the exchange to meet requirements of the federal Affordable Care Act.



Rather than rehash the exchange’s known shortcomings, Hoffer’s office spent the past several months reviewing the Shumlin administration’s response to those challenges and examining whether appropriate changes have been made to achieve the administration’s desired outcomes.



The results outlined in the report are mixed.



Gov. Peter Shumlin, a third-term Democrat, announced last month a new time frame for bringing key automated functions online. The ability to make online changes to one’s personal information, known as change of circumstance, will be in place by May 30, the administration now promises. An automated coverage renewal process will follow in the fall — in time for the next open enrollment period.



Should those deadlines be missed, the administration said last month, it will begin to transition away from its own exchange and try to migrate to one run by the federal government.



Hoffer’s report outlines several issues that makes meeting the deadlines questionable.



The state’s contract with Optum, the firm now developing VHC, contains no provision for monetary consequences if it fails to deliver the missing functions. There are no financial penalties or liquidated damages like those in place with the state’s previous contractor, CGI, which the state parted ways with last fall. Nor is there a provision allowing the state to retain payment until the project is complete.



“Without these types of clauses, Optum has assumed little contractual risk and the state has limited its ability to seek recourse if the contractor’s performance is unacceptable,” the report said. “This seems to be a result of the state’s limited leverage to negotiate better terms.”



Meanwhile, the state does not have a contract to complete the second upgrade slated for the fall. If a contract is in place in the next couple of months, then completing the project “is considered feasible,” according to the report.



Still, the state will not know if it has the funding to pay for all of the development work until it negotiates a price with Optum. The state would have to reduce the scope of work or find more money if the developer’s price is higher than the federal funding available.



“According to an independent verification and validation contractor, as of April 3, 2015, the VHC development project has been in long-term ‘red,’ or high-risk, status due to continuous contracting delays and unresolved agreement on the scope to support all VHC requirements,” the report says.



Hoffer’s report also raises concerns about competition for the staffing and technical resources within state government needed to meet the administration’s self-imposed deadlines.



It notes that a March 16 internal project status report indicated the resources to help meet those deadlines had not yet been confirmed. And there was a lack of agreement between various Agency of Human Services departments about which resources would be allocated to the VHC system development project.







Risk called real



Lawrence Miller, Shumlin’s chief of health care reform and the man charged with righting the ship, acknowledged the report is highly critical and casts doubt on the administration’s ability to meet its deadlines.



“I don’t know that the track record of Vermont Health Connect has given anybody the basis for confidence,” he said in an interview before the audit’s release. “I think that the auditor’s assessment of the risk of completing the project on time is accurate. There is not a lot of slack in the schedule.”



Still, Miller said the administration remains confident the work will be completed on time.



“This has been done with a good, detailed project plan. Optum and the carriers are saying it’s achievable,” he said. “Things are happening on time.”



Upgrading the website by May 30 is dependent on the completion of certain tasks via offline workarounds replacing the lacking technology. The state must finish entering a backlog of policy renewals for 2015, as well as complete a billing reconciliation process with the state’s payment processor, Benaissance, and the insurance carriers.







Missing millions



The reconciliation process has become a headache for all parties. As the Vermont Press Bureau reported earlier this month, there are millions of dollars in discrepancies among the records kept by the state, Benaissance and the insurance carriers concerning premium payments because the systems used by each do not communicate electronically as planned.



The audit report sheds more light on those discrepancies. It states that BCBS, as of Feb. 28, had 6,310 customers on its books that owed it $5.5 million in premiums. Most of the customers had ended their coverage, but BCBS was made aware only that 2,046 customers who owed $1.5 million in premiums had terminated coverage. That left $4 million in outstanding revenue for BCBS.



According to the report, Blue Cross sent a letter to the state in February expressing “serious concerns about the collectability of its accounts receivables as of Dec. 31, 2014.” The company has threatened to bill the state for any premiums on its books it cannot collect.



“Citing VHC’s operational deficiencies as the cause of the magnitude of its receivables, Blue Cross Blue Shield stated that it did not think it fair to pursue full collection of these past due balances from customers nor to trigger grace periods for potential termination,” the report states. “Therefore, the carrier stated that it intended to invoice the state for 2014 amounts that are past due by 90 days or more, as of the end of March 2015 (according to a Blue Cross Blue Shield official, this has been delayed until at least April 30, 2015).”



The state’s scattered, offline system of enrolling Vermonters in health care plans, billing and collecting payment has resulted in BCBS paying out claims for policies that should have been terminated. In some cases, the state retroactively canceled policies as change of circumstance requests were processed, after BCBS paid claims, according to the report.



“A Blue Cross Blue Shield official told us that in general the carrier planned to offset future provider payments for these claims. According to the official, the carrier believes that most of the customers in these circumstances had moved to a different carrier or Medicaid and therefore the provider should be able to obtain payment from the responsible party,” the report states.



The state’s other insurance carrier, MVP Health Care, did not participate in the workaround processes the state set up. As a result, it had far less risk of such billing discrepancies.



Miller said the reconciliation process has already lowered Blue Cross’s maximum exposure to about $1.8 million and that the amount will drop further. Some bad debt is expected in the course of business, he said.







Mystery millions



Meanwhile, as of the end of January, Benaissance was holding about $5 million in misapplied or unallocated payments. The state, according to the report, is unsure if the money is partial customer payments, amounts due to be refunded to customers, overpayments on active accounts or prepayments made by customers.



Only full premium payments are forwarded to the carriers, so customers who submit partial payment are not credited with having made a payment. As of March 24, the state had not received requested reports from Benaissance with details on the makeup of this balance.



Among the more serious revelations in the report is that the state has been paying Benaissance $41,750 a month — a total of $580,000 as of the end of February — for processing payments related to small business enrollment. But Benaissance is not processing any small business premiums; that is being done directly through the carriers.



Miller said those payments to Benaissance are the only surprise in the audit. The firm was originally a subcontractor for CGI, and the state assumed the existing contract when it split with CGI. A new contract in the works will stop the payments, he said.







‘No room for error’



The administration says it has no intention of pulling the plug on Vermont Health Connect in June if the first deadline is missed. Miller said final decisions will be made later in the year.



“I have to make a recommendation to the Joint Fiscal Committee in November. I’m going to make that recommendation based on what we know in October, not on what we know on June 1,” Miller said. “If the date slips past May 30, that increases the risk of having the renewals package delivered on time. It triggers the need to have much more robust contingency planning for not having automated renewal for the fall.”



Miller said the administration agrees the project remains a high risk. But the changes put in place after initial failures should help the state meet its goals, he said.



“Right now as we speak everyone involved believes that it is achievable. Everyone involved also feels that the schedule has no room for error,” he said. “The only thing I can do is ask for the best efforts from the state of Vermont’s team, our contractors and the carriers to do everything they can do to meet that deadline. I feel very good that everybody is pulling in the same direction and working very well together, which has not always been the case on this project.”



neal.goswami @timesargus.com