Opinion

Letters to the Editor, April 17

Photo: Santiago Mejia, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Buy photo Archdiocese of San Francisco Salvatore Cordileone speaks with former U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz during the S.F. Chronicle's Visionary of the Year event at the Fairmont Hotel, Tuesday, March 31, 2015, in San Francisco, Calif. less Archdiocese of San Francisco Salvatore Cordileone speaks with former U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz during the S.F. Chronicle's Visionary of the Year event at the Fairmont Hotel, Tuesday, March 31, 2015, ... more Photo: Santiago Mejia, The Chronicle Buy this photo Letters to the Editor, April 17 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Regarding “Open letter urges pope to oust archbishop” (April 16), rather than condemning Archbishop Salvatore Cordileone, fair-minded Catholics should be giving him a teacher of the year award. All those earnest young high school students standing up for their teachers are learning an important lesson about fairness and their parents are learning about the moral hazards of giving their kids a Catholic education.

Members of the Star of the Sea parish are learning the truth about their leaders’ adherence to outmoded dogma and those that signed the petition requesting his ouster have learned how out of touch the archdiocese is with contemporary society. Rather than pile on him, petitioners should be thanking him for showing why Pope Francis’ attempts to turn the church around are so important to not only Catholics but to the rest of us as well.

Allan Mann, Alameda

Uphold tradition

I would commend Archbishop Salvatore Cordileone for his efforts to invigorate fidelity and integrity in Catholic institutions. As a Catholic parent and an educator, I’m convinced the health of the church going forward depends on the formation of young people, and so Catholics need schools and parishes that will form them in the faith, which admittedly sometimes conflicts with aspects of the spirit of the age.

Indeed, it’s disheartening to see the archbishop’s critics misrepresent his efforts so badly precisely because of their commitment to the spirit of the age. As it is said, the church that marries the spirit of the age becomes a widow in the next, and Cordileone’s efforts seem to me geared to guarantee that the church in the Bay Area remains the ever-youthful bride of Christ.

Leroy Huizenga, Bismarck, N.D.

Well done, archbishop

Our church appreciates financial generosity, however appointments of Bishops, is not a “popularity contest” or “bought.” It seems these “100 donors” have not read the Catechism of the Catholic Church. The Roman Catholic Church is counter culture. Perhaps they need to educate themselves and then make informed decisions as to why they call themselves Roman Catholics.

Education will enable them to appreciate the fact that Roman Catholicism has been tried and tested for over 2000 years. Obviously, Jesus Christ’s message was not “popular.” Many prominent donors have written to the Vatican representative in Washington in support of our archbishop. Our family stands behind this courageous archbishop who teaches the truth whether we want to hear it or not. We applaud him for doing his job.

Jeannie McCullough Stiles, Belvedere

Church doctrine

I am not a Roman Catholic, but it is well known that the church is against, among other things, same-sex marriage, abortion and homosexuality. Archbishop Cordileone is merely enforcing well-established church doctrine albeit in a mean-spirited manner. Pope Francis espouses the same tenets but in a nice, friendly way.

As a result, everyone loves Pope Francis, but too many loathe Archbishop Cordileone. Perhaps the Archbishop needs some lessons in niceness. If members of the Roman Catholic Church do not agree with the tenets of Catholicism and find relevance in an organized religion, perhaps they should look elsewhere for spiritual guidance until the Roman Catholic church changes. But you and I know this is unlikely.

Ralph Stone, San Francisco

Hillary gets it

Regarding “Rubio knows the point of America” (April 15), I appreciate Sen. Marco Rubio saying that America is a place of miracles shaped by those who refused to accept that people are trapped by the circumstances of their birth.

I grew up a very poor girl in a tiny apartment in Asia to become an Ivy League educated scientific researcher in health care in the U.S. I owe a big debt to my adopted motherland, which judges people on their ideas, character and accomplishments instead of birth origin, status and age.

Hillary Clinton’s ideas and years of accomplishments in helping children, improving education, securing health care and improving foreign relations help people like me more than the junior senators conservative agenda such as repealing the Affordable Care Act and opposing the Dream Act. To repay our country, we should help the less privileged like Hillary, instead of taking away help like Rubio who had once enjoyed them.

Kit Lau, Dublin

Protecting kids

Regarding “Vaccination bill buckles under parents’ pressure” (April 16), I’m in support of families who do not wish to have their children immunized, but feel that they must shoulder the education obligations, and should have their children identifiable by wearing a button or ribbon to protect other children from making contact.

Alvin Gross, San Francisco