Amid recent studies of assorted IRS problems, there’s good news in a new report that indicates the agency had a 93 percent accuracy rate in calculating the premium tax credits allowed under the Affordable Care Act for the 2015 filing season.

Still, the report by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA) slaps the tax agency for problems in about 183,000 of the more than 2.6 million tax returns involving the tax credits that were filed between Jan. 20 and May 28, 2015.

The Affordable Care Act created the tax credits as refundable to offset health insurance costs for low- to moderate-income taxpayers. The credits can be claimed before filing a return or on a return. Credits received in advance must be reconciled with the amount that’s actually allowed.

In 2014, the House Appropriations Committee requested that TIGTA evaluate whether overpayments in credits were recouped.

According to the report, computer program errors caused incorrect calculations of the allowable tax credits on almost 28,000 of the 183,000 targeted returns. In almost 5,000 returns, the IRS lacked the authority to correct the tax credit claim during processing of the subsidy. It’s not clear what the issues are with the remaining roughly 150,000 returns, and the report indicates that TIGTA and the IRS are working to determine the cause of “calculation differences.”

The report also indicates that the Affordable Care Act’s health insurance marketplace didn’t give information, known as Exchange Periodic Data, to the IRS before tax season began. System troubles resulted in the IRS’s inability to use the data received between Jan. 20 and March 29, 2015. Without that information, the agency couldn’t electronically match it with filed claims or ensure that taxpayers who got the credits filed a return as they are supposed to.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

Other findings indicated that IRS processes to detect possible fraud in tax credit claims were performing and that the agency corrected programming mistakes found by TIGTA that failed to spot returns that required more review. And, while the agency notified people who received the tax credits but failed to file returns that reconciliation is required, the IRS used out-of-date tax-filing information to identify the taxpayers.

TIGTA recommendations include:

The IRS should review the almost 28,000 tax returns to ensure that the taxpayers get the proper tax credits.

The IRS should adjust its family size and income verification so that the most current information available is used when determining if tax credits have been reconciled.

In a letter responding to TIGTA’s findings, Debra Holland, commissioner of the IRS Wage and Investment Division, said that during the 2015 filing season, more than 300,000 returns were sent back to senders for correction of tax credit errors, inconsistencies, or missing forms. The agency’s other fact-checking resolved about 2.4 million errors before tax returns were processed.

“For those [roughly 28,000] returns where the [tax credit] claim may have been incorrectly verified, due to the reliance on projected partial-year data and programming errors, it is important to note that the IRS does not have the statutory authority to correct discrepancies without following deficiency procedures,” Holland wrote, adding that those procedures are known as audit procedures.

She wrote that audit procedures are costly “and compete with other enforcement priorities for scarce resources. We will review those returns to identify those that merit appropriate follow-up activity.”