With Rep. Sam Smith, R-Jefferson County, saying he’s not coming back to the General Assembly next year, who will be Pennsylvania’s next Speaker of the House?

To answer that, you have to answer these questions first.

What party is going to be in the majority after the 2014 elections?

The speaker is elected by a majority of the whole House, which is another way of saying it is an election that the majority party usually controls.

All 203 House seats are up for election in 2014.

With a 111-92 edge in the House at this writing, it seems hard to believe that the House Republicans will lose their grip on power this year — whether or not Gov. Tom Corbett is re-elected.

This is politics, so we’ll never say never.

So much depends on the quality of the individual candidates both parties have recruited to run, the state of the economy as the year goes on, even whether the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is perceived to be working. Or not.

But for the sake of argument today, and with all due respect to the Democratic Party, let’s assume the GOP retains the House.

If the Republicans win the next question is … What does Mike Turzai want?

Turzai, a Republican attorney from the Pittsburgh suburbs, is House majority leader right now, and that’s the position from which speakers are usually born. It also means that he’s won his caucus’s backing for this kind of election before.

But there were differing views Tuesday on how badly Turzai, 54, wants the speaker’s job.

Some believe he wants to continue driving the Legislature’s policy agenda as only the majority leader can. Turzai, to these people, is a true conservative advocate who would have a hard time staying on the sidelines on the big issue of the day.

Others said they believe he would naturally be interested in the serving in the highest office in the state House. As one source put it: “I can’t see him allowing someone to go above him.”

And one person suggested this scenario. Turzai stays in place to work his issues for one more term, maybe two, and seeks to promote his caucus chairman, Rep. Sandra Major, R-Susquehanna County, into the speaker’s role.

Republicans make history with the first female speaker, Turzai has an ally and not a rival in the top spot, and the promise of moving into the office down the road.

But, that’s all future talk.

“It’s a chess match rite now, and nobody really knows what’s going to happen,” said John O’Connell, a lobbyist who used to work for the House GOP. “But it all goes back to, Mike has to make the first move.”

Turzai declined requests for comment on his future Tuesday, choosing instead only to praise Smith for his service.

If Turzai wants it, could he win it?

The consensus at the Capitol on Tuesday is, probably.

Turzai has built a strong base of supporters in his home Southwestern counties and linked them to the more conservative members in the northern tier and south central counties that make up the reliably Republican Pennsylvania "T."

He’s proven himself adept at winning the support of newly elected members — who will vote on the caucus leadership team in November — with timely campaign contributions and other help.

Turzai does have less support with GOP members from the Philadelphia suburbs, who tend to be more moderate and sensitive to the concerns of organized labor, to name one special interest.

Turzai could well draw a challenger from the GOP’s more moderate ranks, several sources said Tuesday. But at this early point, the view from here is it’s that dissenter who has the uphill road.

And we don’t think for one minute that the Republicans, whatever their fissures, would let anyone win the speakership who didn’t command the allegiance of a majority of the majority.

In other words, dissenting Republicans plus House Democrats aren’t likely to win.

“I honestly feel we’ll come together with a leadership team like we always do,” said Rep. Kate Harper, R-Montgomery County, and one of the more moderate members of the Republican caucus. “We’re not Congress. And we’re not Democrats.”

Who else gets to join the new leadership team?

There will be at least one person joining the inner-most power circles of state government power with Smith’s impending retirement. That much we know, because at the least the House will need a new Speaker or majority leader.

The names we heard most on Tuesday, in an unscientific survey, included several current members of the House Republican leadership team, like (in alphabetical order):

Rep. Bill Adolph, R-Delaware.

The current House Appropriations chairman has 26 years' seniority and gives members from the southeast a comfortable face in leadership.

But he’s not a favorite of some of the more conservative members in the caucus, which led some observers to suggest Tuesday that Adolph’s smartest play may be staying right where he is.

Some also wondered if he wants the work that comes with the majority leader’s post which, like its counterpart office in the state Senate, is probably one of the two most taxing jobs in the General Assembly.

Rep. David Reed, R-Indiana.

Currently chairman of the House Majority Policy Committee, Reed has performed well in just about every caucus task he’s received to date, and has maintained good relations with all members.

But Reed, 35, would have to leapfrog over a lot of fellow leaders to get a top spot now.

Another potential liability could be geography. If Turzai holds one of the top spots, it’s not really balancing the leadership ticket for the GOP to give the other one to someone from two counties over.

Rep. Mike Vereb, R-Montgomery County.

Vereb has quickly moved into the caucus secretary role, and probably wants to keep climbing. Some observers said Vereb, still only in his fourth term, may need more seasoning before getting a top role.

Adolph and Reed both said they weren’t worrying about future roles now, asserting the priorities for 2014 are passing a good budget and making sure Republicans stay in the majority.

Vereb did not respond to a message from PennLive.

A final note.

If several people do move up the ladder, opportunities will open for junior leadership posts, too.

In the mix for consideration there, again alphabetically, are several midstaters, including Reps. Bryan Cutler, R-Quarryville, Glen Grell, R-Hampden Township, and Ron Marsico, R-Lower Paxton Township.

Grell, chairman of the 25-member South Central Caucus, declined comment on his own interest in a leadership spot Tuesday.

But he did say that the regional group — represented solely by Majority Whip Stan Saylor, R-Red Lion, now — does feel it has a legitimate claim to a second leadership spot within the caucus.