With the first minimum wage increase in a set of three incremental changes to Arkansas’ wage requirement set for January 2015, Conway employers are determining what the increase from $6.25 to $7.50 per hour will mean for business.

Arkansas voters approved of the change in this year’s election with 66 percent (547,057) in favor and 34 percent (282,821) opposed, according to unofficial numbers from the Arkansas Secretary of State’s office. In Faulkner County, unofficial numbers show 62 percent of county voters (20,878) supported the Issue 5 ballot measure with 38 percent against (12,561).

The state’s minimum wage will increase to $8 per hour on Jan. 1, 2016 and to $8.50 per hour on Jan. 1, 2017.

According to the Arkansas Department of Labor, employers with four or more employees must currently pay at least $6.25 per hour, though employers with more than $500,000 each year in business must pay the federal minimum wage, $7.25 per hour.

The federal minimum wage was last increased from $6.55 per hour in 2008 to $7.25 per hour in 2009, according to the U.S. Department of Labor.

One of Conway’s largest employers, Conway Regional Health System with about 1,330 employees, according to the Conway Development Corporation (CDC), doesn’t foresee a negative impact in the short term.

“Conway Regional began planning two years ago in regards to making sure our employees are paid above the minimum wage and as a result, very few of our employees are currently working at that rate,” Lori Ross Scroggin, corporate director of marketing and foundation at Conway Regional, said. “We anticipated the passage of the statewide proposal to increase the minimum wage and already have funds budgeted for next year to cover that expense.”

Another one of the city’s main sources for jobs is Conway Public Schools, which employs about 1,100 in the school district, according to the CDC.

Greg Murry, superintendent of Conway Public Schools, said the district does not have “any employee who is making at or less than $7.50 an hour, so there will be no impact on our budget this year.”

He added that a lower wage impacts only a limited number of employees, with most receiving well above the minimum wage as faculty and staff.

Kyle Tabor, Blue Sail Coffee owner and founder, said the minimum wage’s increase will likely have an impact on his business’ profit margin, putting pressure on the coffee shop to pay more with greater chances for national chains such as Starbucks to succeed at a better rate.

“It’s going to be harder for us to grow and our mission is to make a positive impact for the community,” Tabor said, adding that Blue Sail positions itself to offer a unique atmosphere to the city.

Blue Sail, which opened earlier this year as a community coffee shop in downtown Conway, currently has nine employees who are paid $7.25 per hour.

Lisa Covington, owner of The Patio Café, echoed a similar sentiment about concerns as another downtown coffee shop, though her worry lies more in what will happen in 2017.

“I’m looking forward to seeing how it will be a positive but I’m worried about when it gets to $8.50,” she said. “We do struggle to pay what we do.”

Covington said she has to remain positive and supportive of the minimum wage increases overall impact to employees.

“You have to think that way,” she said.

The Patio Café has 10 employees, with non-tip staff earning an average of $7.50 per hour. Tipped employees earn about $3 per hour. The employees alternate in shifts that she said cater to putting education first for college students.

Ken Vaughan, operating partner and COO of The Purple Cow Restaurant in Conway, said his business already pays employees “well over” $8.50 an hour, not factoring in employees who receive less as tip staff.

“In terms of how it’s going to affect [Purple Cow] is yet to be determined,” he said.

Of the about 50 team members employed at Purple Cow in Conway, about half are non-tip employees.

During this year’s election, similar proposals to change state minimum wages were on the ballots in Alaska, increasing from $7.75 to $9.75 an hour by 2016; Nebraska, increasing from $7.25 to $9 an hour by 2016; and South Dakota, increasing from $7.25 to $8.50 per hour in 2015, with an increase based on inflation after that.

Voters in each of the four states passed the wage increase measures.

(Staff writer Brandon Riddle can be reached by email at brandon.riddle@thecabin.net, by phone at 505-1215 or on Twitter @BrandonCRiddle. To comment on this and other stories in the Log Cabin, log on to www.thecabin.net. Send us your news at www.thecabin.net/submit)