American women face conflicting advice about whether to be screened for breast cancer, at what age and how often. The decisions they make are often more strongly influenced by fear or a friend’s experience than by a thorough understanding of the benefits and risks of mammography.

In 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommended that women ages 50-74 be screened with mammography every two years and that biennial screening of women younger than 50 be considered case by case. There is no good evidence on whether women older than 75 should be screened, the task force said.

Yet, screening rates have not declined.

Under the Affordable Care Act, free screening mammography is available to all women every one to two years.

But is this really free, in the fullest sense of the word? Many experts cite hidden costs — financial, medical and emotional.

Before deciding to have a mammogram — every year, every two years, starting at 40 or 50, or not at all — you should consider the possible risks and whether they are outweighed by the expected benefits.

Full disclosure: Fifteen years ago, a sonogram revealed an early invasive cancer in my left breast. The cancer was not seen on the mammogram, but had I not gone for one, that sonogram would not have been done to see why I had pain in my breast.

There is no way to know whether my cancer would have disappeared or would have eventually claimed my life, but once I knew it was there, a decision to have it removed was inescapable.

Despite the controversy about annual mammograms, I still advocate them. But it behooves every woman to be aware of the arguments for and against annual screening. Too few are equipped to evaluate what Dr. Lisa Rosenbaum, a national correspondent for The New England Journal of Medicine, has called “considerable uncertainty and complex trade-offs.”

Although expert groups have issued guidelines based on reviews of the scientific evidence, disagreements among them persist, the result of differing professional perspectives, financial concerns and assessments of the medical consequences.

Despite the task force guideline, the American Cancer Society, the American College of Radiology and the Society of Breast Imaging continue to recommend yearly mammograms starting at 40 for women at average risk for breast cancer.

The college maintains that screening is largely responsible for the 30 percent decline in the breast cancer death rate since 1990, though advances in treatment have certainly played a role. But a recent review of the available evidence by researchers at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston suggested that regular screening accounted for only a 19 percent reduction overall in breast cancer mortality.

So what are the downsides of regular screening? A false-positive result — a suspicious image on mammography that turns out to be nothing — is a major one.

If a 50-year-old woman is screened annually for a decade, she has a 50 percent chance of receiving a false-positive diagnosis somewhere along the way, according to Dr. H. Gilbert Welch and Honor J. Passow of the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice.

The woman receiving a false-positive diagnosis may need only a repeat examination, which may show the initial result to have been wrong. But if that, too, looks suspicious, a biopsy must be done, which happens to 2 percent of women screened.

The lesion might turn out to be benign; still, the patient has endured considerable anxiety, inconvenience and expense.

And what if the biopsy reveals a malignancy? Then the patient faces another possible consequence of screening: overtreatment.

There are lingering questions about whether every cancer detected really warrants treatment and how extensive the treatment should be. Some cancers don’t progress, some may even disappear on their own, and others may grow so slowly they would not become a problem during the remaining years of life. But doctors cannot tell with certainty which cancers are safe to leave untreated.

Rosenbaum cited a survey in which more than 99 percent of women knew mammography could result in a false-positive diagnosis, but only 38 percent believed this possibility should be weighed in decisions about whether to have the test.

Even among those who had a false-positive result, “more than 90 percent still believed that mammography could not harm a woman who ended up not having breast cancer,” she said.

The seemly contradictory responses are part of “the tangled nature of emotions and values” that women bring to mammography, Rosenbaum wrote.

One study of women in their 40s found that advising them to delay screening until they were 50 only strengthened their desire for screening. Some believed the task force guideline was an attempt to lower insurance costs and keep them from receiving needed care.

Decisions relating to breast cancer are often based more on emotion than reasoning. Unrelenting publicity by well-meaning organizations has frightened many women, who are inclined to accept more risk than they might in, say, screenings for heart disease — which actually kills more women than breast cancer.

And too many have seen firsthand the devastation breast cancer can wreak.