Democrat Charlie Crist has officially been a candidate for governor for only a month, but already it is becoming clear Sarasota and Manatee counties will be a key fundraising base for his campaign.

In November, Crist raised $200,000 from area donors for a political action committee called Charlie Crist for Florida. And he has raised nearly $11,000 more from area donors for his principle campaign committee.

Between both accounts, Crist has raised just over $3 million for his highly anticipated 2014 battle with Gov. Rick Scott, a Republican.

Crist’s biggest local donor was Venice retiree Rosalie Danbury. She donated $150,000 to Crist’s political action committee. The Luhrsen Law Group and Sarasota resident Marty Rauch were tied for second, having donated $25,000 each to Crist’s campaign.

Notable among his early donors is Siesta Key’s Gary Kompothecras, a Republican. The founder of the 1-800-ASK-GARY medical referral company donated just over $500 to Crist’s principle campaign committee in November.

While the nearly $211,000 haul in the region is impressive for one month for Crist, it is far short of what Scott has raised in the region, albeit over a longer stretch. Scott has raised nearly $830,000 from Sarasota and Bradenton donors dating back to mid-2010. Of that, nearly $575,000 came since the start of 2013.

His biggest area donor has been Osprey resident and developer Randy Benderson, who gave $200,000 to Scott’s fund. The next-highest donor in the region was FCCI, a Lakewood Ranch insurance company which has been responsible for $137,000 to Scott’s Let’s Get to Work account.

Overall Scott has raised more than $42 million in the Let’s Get to Work Committee, and spent about $20 million, according to state election records.

Many political experts think the Florida race will be one of the most expensive and combative gubernatorial races in the nation because of the unusual matchup. Crist was a Republican governor from 2006-10, but left to run for the U.S. Senate and lost. In 2010, Scott succeeded Crist, who has since switched party affiliation twice and is hoping to beat Scott, whose voter approval ratings are among the lowest of any governor in the nation.

Help from afar

Democrat Gwen Graham is running for a congressional district based in north Florida.

But that is not stopping local Democrats from wanting to chip in to help her.

Graham, the daughter of former Florida Gov. and U.S. Sen. Bob Graham, was in Sarasota last week for a private fundraiser to build support for what has become one of the most watched races in the nation. Graham is challenging Rep. Steve Southerland, R-Panama City, in what many expect to be one of the most competitive congressional battles in Florida in 2014.

They are vying for the 2nd Congressional District, which includes parts of 14 counties stretching from Bay County to Taylor County. The district includes Tallahassee and Panama City.

More than 60 people attended the event in Sarasota on Wednesday, including a who’s who of Democratic players in the area. Former congressional candidates Christine Jennings and Keith Fitzgerald were on the host committee for the event, which also included Sarasota Democratic Party chairwoman Rita Ferrandino, Ed Chiles (son of the former Gov. and U.S. Sen. Lawton Chiles), and former Sarasota city commissioners Ken Shelin and Kelly Kirschner.

“It is so humbling to have so much support in my district and outside of my district,” Graham said.

Nationally, Democrats need to flip 17 seats currently held by Republicans to regain the majority in the U.S. House. And locally Democrats see Graham as one of their best hopes to flip a seat in Florida.

She is not the only one looking beyond her district for fundraising help. Southerland was also hitting the road for donations. He was scheduled to be in Pinellas County on Sunday to raise money for the contest with Graham.

Fox news co-host coming

The co-host of one of Fox News Channel’s most watched programs will be the keynote speaker at the Manatee Lincoln Day Dinner early next year.

Andrea Tantaros, co-host of “The Five,” has agreed to speak at the dinner, which serves as the Manatee County Republican Party’s biggest fundraising event for the year.

Besides being a co-host on “The Five,” Tantaros has had her own conservative radio program and was a communications specialist for several Republican political campaigns before joining Fox News Channel.

Manatee GOP chairwoman Kathleen King said Tantaros brings a combination of youth, credentials and experience to the annual fundraising dinner, which honors President Abraham Lincoln, the first Republican elected president.

The dinner will be on Feb. 15 at the Bradenton Area Convention Center, One Haben Blvd., Palmetto. Tickets start at $125.

For more information call the Republican Party of Manatee County at 714-0600.

Area political events

Today

• Suzanne Dickie of the Florida League of Women Voters speaks to the Anna Maria Island Democratic Club about the Affordable Care Act. The event begins at noon at the Mannatees Sports Grill, 7423 Manatee Ave. W., Bradenton. Reservations are not required. Lunch is $15 for members and $17 for guests. For more information call 779-0564.