Jim Parks finds novel repurposing for discards at El Vado property

Boulder Canyon offers twist upon turn upon twist upon turn flanked by soaring pines and a pristine waterway tumbling over rocks polished by the passage of time.

Oh, and there's also the — well, exactly what are those things?

"It's sort of Ozark art ... hillbilly art," said Jim Parks, standing alongside two creations that have taken root and flourished on his property facing Colo. 119, just east of the turnoff for Magnolia Road.

"There is a generalized direction of what's going on there," he asserted. "It's arranged junk."

There are those who say art tells us a story about ourselves and our place in the world, and that's certainly true about what has sprung up in recent years outside the old El Vado Motel, which Parks bought, along with his now ex-wife, back in 1992.

Near the time of the 2012 USA Pro Cycling Challenge, knowing the route would bring cyclists charging up Boulder Canyon past his place, Parks figured he'd put an old bicycle and mock-up of a rider atop one of the old cottonwood stumps fronting his property.

"Just for kind of fun's sake," Parks told a recent visitor. "I threw a big party, had a case of cowbells; we had a good crew here and cheered 'em on as they went by. It lasted about 90 seconds."

But the seed of inspiration planted that day has flowered into something else altogether. As the countless thousands who have motored up and down the canyon in the succeeding years have noticed, there is now an explosion of materials amassed in tangles on top of two tree stumps, less than 20 feet apart.

Advertisement

'It just kind of grew out of the trash'

One person's junk might be another's Picasso, and closer scrutiny — Parks estimates that "a couple hundred" people pull over to eyeball it each year, particularly during summer months — reveals that his creations are more than just a contortion of random refuse.

In fact, they are clearly themed. One, closer to his residence, is tailored to the detritus of the working world. A short distance away, its partner is dedicated to the universe of play.

Jim Parks keeps adding to, and adjusting, the roadside sculptures outside his home at the former El Vado Motel in Boulder Canyon. The American flags on this piece were added for Memorial Day and will come down after Labor Day. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

"That's kind of the yin and yang here," Parks said. "It just kind of grew out of the trash that I had. "

A guided tour of the work pile reveals his mother's old vacuum, mops, a printer ("that HP3 was a $1,700 printer when I bought it"), old mining tools, a keyboard ("I spend as much of my working life at my desk as I do out in the field"), saws, alarm clocks, a drywall knife, a monkey and a skeleton.

A monkey and a skeleton?

"Work is the monkey on everybody's back," Parks explained. As for the skeleton, "Work is what kills you, ultimately."

On that note, he steps over to the yang side of things, the carefree world of recreation. Much of the gear is discarded playware of his three sons, now ranging in age from 13 to 19. But some of the stuff there goes back further.

"We've got cross-country gear, downhill gear, K2 comps — these are like, high-end '60s skis. I got some air on those old pieces of (expletive)," the 55-year-old said, wistfully.

There is also: a lacrosse stick, a left-handed hockey stick, softballs, several badminton rackets, a dart stuck in one of his old fishing waders, a model off-road vehicle, bamboo cross country ski poles ("Can't buy these anymore"), a soccer ball, a mandolin case, a catcher's mask, a whiffle ball, a fishing net, a Barbie doll.

What's the deal with the Barbie?

"Probably better picking up chicks sporting than working," Parks offered.

And however much there is, there used to be more.

"I've had people pilfer pieces out of it," he said. "I had a unicycle with a taco'd tire. Somebody unscrewed it and drove off with it a couple of years ago."

Is it art? 'I've seen worse'

Parks, a Missouri native, graduated in 1982 from the University of Colorado with a degree in environmental design, and he has made his living as a designer, builder and independent real estate broker. Now, he is in the development stage of creating an outdoor furniture line.

While Parks does not make great pretensions that what is underway on his property by the roadside is art with a capital "A," there's nevertheless an appreciation for art in his background.

"I grew up around art," he said. "My mother taught art in my high school in Hazelwood, Missouri, and she took me to a lot of galleries and museums. She loved art. She was an art historian."

And so he is asked to play critic on what he has wrought.

"I've seen worse," he said. "I remember my mom being astonished by some sculptures. ... You couldn't believe the price tag on something. You just looked at it and said, 'Oh, I don't think so.'

"My take has always been that everybody is an artist. It's just that some are better than others. There are definitely better sculptures out there than this."

And someday, like pretty much everything but the rocks, the river and the mountain peaks that loom nearby, Parks' work will be gone. For one thing, the stumps his creations are planted on are already rotting away. He thinks they will collapse within just a few years.

"Someday I'll just push it out closer to the highway and people will just take it. You can get rid of anything here," Parks said.

Veering into the more philosophical, he mused, "It's evolving and devolving at the same time. It's just in slow degrade. Like everything else. It's all going rusty.

"The sun kills everything."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan