The Annandale Reformed Church choir rehearses for its first appearance in the upcoming interfaith concert. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Marylu Korkuch) Story Highlights Free interfaith concert brings together churches from throughout Hunterdon County.

Food donations are encouraged for local food pantry.

Soloists, instrumentalists and choirs are scheduled to perform.

Hundreds of guests are expected to gather at Immaculate Conception Catholic Church in the Annandale section of Clinton Township on Sunday, Nov. 29, to enjoy sounds of the season from soloists, instrumentalists, choirs and musical groups at the fifth annual Joyeux Noel Interfaith Christmas Benefit Concert.

Renaye Wimmer, who is co-chairing this event with Marylu Korkuch, choral director of Immaculate Conception, said this concert truly exemplifies the holiday season.

“This event is so special because it brings many congregations and other groups of people together in the community for one common purpose: to share the true message of Christmas … Christ’s birth and His example of love,” Wimmer said.

According to Korkuch, guests usually begin arriving at 4:30 p.m. The concert begins at 5, and Immaculate Conception’s pastor, Monsignor Randy Vashon, will welcome guests.

“On this one afternoon, we come together and celebrate our common belief in Jesus Christ and proclaim it with one voice. I am so proud of this community of believers where we can, at least on this one day, focus on what unites us,” Vashon said.

Each choir from participating houses of worship will perform a sacred work of their choosing.

In addition to Immaculate Conception, participating churches and groups are Lower Valley Presbyterian Church in Califon, Clinton Church of the Nazarene in Clinton; Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, Annandale Reformed Church and the Hunterdon Harmonizers.

Some of the pieces to be performed:

Immaculate Conception adult choir: "See Amid the Winter Snow”

Immaculate Conception jazz band: "Hallelujah”

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints’ adult choir: "Far Far Away on Judean Plains”

Lower Valley Presbyterian Bell Choirs: Agape Ringers "Christmas Joy”

Faith Ensemble Ringers: "Now Sing We All of Christmas”

Annandale Reformed Church: "The Little Road to Bethlehem.”

The Clinton Church of the Nazarene had not announced its selection.

One of the highlights of the evening is sure to be the performance by children in grades 2 to 8 from all the participating churches, who will sing "Away in a Manger" — complete with costumes of shepherds, donkeys, angels and more. In addition, a contingent of Hunterdon Harmonizers, who will perform a medley of sacred carols in their signature "barbershop" style.

“This event has become a personal favorite for me and my family because it blends together so many elements of community in celebration of the spirit of giving, which is Christmas,” added Don Reckenbeil, musical director of the Hunterdon Harmonizers Men’s Barbershop Chorus.

The concert finale will be all the church groups performing Handel's "Hallelujah Chorus" together.

Following the concert, refreshments will be served in Immaculate Conception’s parish hall. ShopRite in Clinton has donated refreshments for the concert, Korkuch said.

Although there is no fee to attend the concert, guests are asked to bring canned or nonperishable food items to donate, benefiting the Open Cupboard Food Pantry.

This year’s youth volunteer is Sophie Martin, a seventh-grade student at Warren Hills Middle School in Washington Borough. She will be assisting with food collection. Martin is a congregant of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

“They needed a youth volunteer for the food drive, and I raised my hand,” said Martin, 12. “I’ve really enjoyed working with the food bank. They’re really nice people and their program is really lovely. “

Immaculate Conception Catholic Church is at 316 Old Allerton Road in the Annandale section of Clinton.

For information visit, www.facebook.com/interfaithchristmasconcert.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1jl2Ixr