University of Missouri graduate students were taking part in a “day of action” Wednesday — the latest turn in a battle between the students and MU administrators over a list of student grievances.

Those grievances became a rallying point for graduate students after MU’s decision this month, later rescinded, to stop providing subsidies to pay for graduate student employees’ health insurance premiums.

Related article: MU graduate students to plan next steps after march highlights student issues

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Students had threatened to walk out of classrooms, labs and offices to bring attention to demands including health insurance, better pay and housing assistance. The Forum on Graduate Rights student group later labeled Wednesday a “day of action” instead after talking with MU administrators about their demands.

Graduate student Anahita Zare, a Forum on Graduate Rights spokeswoman, said the group encouraged students who feel comfortable leaving work at their assistantships or not attending class Wednesday to help with the group’s education efforts. Students were stationed around campus throughout the day, and a rally and march were planned for noon at the Columns.

“We’re calling it a celebration because the,” administration’s “communication thus far has been a small step, but a step nonetheless,” Zare said. “And we want to use this gathering to draw attention to the issues that we as graduate students face.”

More than 60 MU departments sent the Forum on Graduate Rights letters supporting graduate students, with some backing the initial walkout idea and promising not to penalize students for participating. A Department of Anthropology statement said it supports a walkout and that some faculty would cancel classes to join graduate students in solidarity.

School of Journalism graduate faculty said in a statement that they would not penalize graduate student employees who participate in a walkout should one occur. Graduate students are “crucial” and a “tremendous source of pride” for the journalism school, the statement said.

The noon rally and march were meant to celebrate the important role graduate students have on campus, Zare said.

Last school year, graduate students taught 2,325 of 16,946 class sections at MU, university spokeswoman Mary Jo Banken said. The university’s 6,266 graduate students also contribute to research, which helps boost MU’s status with the Association of American Universities.

University officials have said MU cannot guarantee health insurance assistance next school year for graduate student employees. A task force is assessing the university’s options this fall, and Chancellor R. Bowen Loftin said a decision will be made in January.

The health insurance issue has been resolved for now, but the decision was “the spark that lit a long-accumulated pile of kindling,” a Forum on Graduate Rights letter said. The group, which formed after MU said students no longer would receive insurance subsidies, sent the letter to members of the university community, including undergraduate students and their parents, this week.

Eric Scott, graduate student with the Forum on Graduate Rights, said he thought Loftin’s response and decision to reissue insurance subsidies for this year was a good first step.

Loftin’s decision led the group to change its plans of a walkout to a day of graduate student celebration, advocacy and solidarity to draw attention to the group’s demands: better living wages, full tuition waivers, subsidized healthcare, international student health subsidies, on-campus housing, on-campus child care and an elimination of fees.

The lack of communication and student input in the initial decision to stop providing insurance subsidies sparked a conversation among graduate students about unionizing. Scott said any efforts to unionize would be an independent student effort and would not go through an official student group. The Forum on Graduate Rights has a committee devoted to discussing the possibility.