Collaborative proposal would use existing buildings, put more focus on transitional services

Boulder Homeless Service Collaborative New proposals from the Boulder Homeless Service Collaborative call for BOHO to run a day shelter program at a rotating set of downtown congregations, while Bridge House expands its Resource Center case-management services to five days a week, with services located at the Boulder Shelter for the Homeless three mornings a week. The three agencies also plan to share information more frequently until a coordinated data system can be developed. The goals of the collaborative are to ensure basic survival needs are met while shifting more resources to transitional rather than emergency services. Here's what the three agencies do now: Bridge House runs a day shelter out of an old carriage house behind First Congregational Church in downtown Boulder, as well as Community Table, an evening meal program, the Resource Center, a centralized location with services from multiple agencies, and the Ready to Work transitional employment program. Bridge House also provides general case management services. Bridge House plans to open a 48-bed transitional housing building at 4747 Table Mesa Drive this summer. Bridge House provided services to 1,954 individual clients in 2014. The Boulder Shelter for the Homeless, 4869 N. Broadway, provides overnight shelter, meals and support services. The shelter has 160 beds, 60 of which are available for people in the First Step transitional program, and 100 of which are available through a lottery for emergency shelter from October to April. This summer, another 30 beds are being made available in the transitional program. The shelter also manages 55 clients in permanent supportive housing. In 2014, the shelter served 1,204 individuals. Boulder Outreach for Homeless Overflow (BOHO) is "the safety net under the safety net." Founded in 2009 to provide a safe place for those turned away from the shelter, BOHO operates emergency warming shelters through a group of 15 churches and synagogues. It also operates a year-round co-ed Resident's Shelter and Women's Shelter, open by application to those with a record of good behavior, as well as emergency day shelter on holidays and weekends with inclement weather. Its employees are formerly or currently homeless. BOHO served 1,550 individual clients in 2014.

Boulder's three main homeless service providers hope they have an answer to the vexing problem of providing a place for homeless people to be during the day.

Boulder Outreach for Homeless Overflow is in conversations with a number of downtown congregations to host a day shelter in those churches' fellowship halls and common rooms Monday through Saturday on the same kind of rotating basis that they run an emergency shelter in the winter.

At the same time, Bridge House's Resource Center, which currently operates two days a week in the annex the First Presbyterian Church downtown, will take its case-management services to the Boulder Shelter for the Homeless in north Boulder three mornings a week.

The proposals are the result of months of conversations among the three agencies, termed the Boulder Homeless Service Collaborative, about how to better use their resources and close gaps in service.

Those meetings began after a report commissioned by the Community Foundation Serving Boulder County called for a major reorganization of the city's homeless service providers.

The three agencies hope to shift more of their resources into transitional services, rather than expand sheltering year-round, and do more to encourage their clients to take advantage of those services.

"If we do this effectively, someone who walks into the day shelter could very quickly be connected to transitional services instead of languishing in emergency services," said Isabel McDevitt, executive director of Bridge House. "We don't want to grow walk-up, emergency, no-questions-asked services."

They also hope to relieve the pressure placed on the Boulder Main Public Library and other public buildings that have served as de facto day shelters for the city's homeless, and, in turn, reduce some of the tension in the community around homeless services.

Among the metrics the members of the collaborative plan to use to measure their effectiveness are fewer complaints about homeless people downtown and fewer tickets issued by police.

"It's a necessity for the downtown area to have a place where people legally can be," said Greg Harms, executive director of the Boulder Shelter. "I hope we can pull it off. We hope this will have a positive impact both for our clients and for the community, especially downtown.

"That's why we've picked this path."

The three agencies plan to start sharing data on a weekly basis until the more complicated task of building an integrated database can be addressed. That will help them figure out who is getting what services at which agency, and reach out to people who are getting a bed and a meal, but not using the services that might help them make long-term changes.

BOHO's workers, who are formerly or currently homeless themselves, will be trained in how to talk to people who are using the rotating day shelter about available services.

Locating Bridge House's Resource Center at the Boulder Shelter three mornings a week will allow shelter residents to meet with case workers, attend addiction recovery groups and get other services in the same place they spent the night.

Currently, residents of the shelter — which is open for emergency sheltering from October to April — have to leave by 8 a.m., and services are located in a variety of locations around town.

"This is really an extension of services we have already brought to the shelter," Harms said. "Over the course of 33 years, we have found we have a much better chance of getting services to our clients if we bring the services to them."

Harms said he believes offering these services is within the scope of the existing management plan.

Gail Promboin, a member of the shelter's neighborhood committee who has been critical in the past of how the shelter interacted with its neighbors, said she doesn't believe offering more services three days a week will have a big impact on the neighborhood. Only people who have appointments or group meetings will stay on site.

"The more that they focus on services that lead to stabilization instead of just a meal and a bed, the better," she said. "I don't see an adverse impact on the neighborhood."

'Being given a fish every day'

Where to locate day services has been a contentious issue in Boulder.

Before launching the Resource Center, all of Bridge House's services — meals, day shelter, case management, addiction recovery groups — were squeezed into a 1,200-square-foot carriage house in the alley behind First Congregational Church, 1128 Pine St.

On cold or rainy days, people are still squeezed shoulder-to-shoulder in the carriage house.

"It's a sardine can in there," said Zoltan Mezei as he waited for lunch on Friday.

Mezei said he would appreciate services that helped him change his situation. He said he got tired of working for $8 or $10 an hour and not even covering basic costs, but, at the same time, the current services feel like "being given a fish every day."

In 2011, Bridge House suspended a search for a location that could house all its services in one, expansive space after an intense backlash from neighbors of every potential site. Even news of Bridge House board members touring a property seemed to spark panic.

Since then, Bridge House has spun off its Resource Center to provide more space for case management services. A transitional housing project in south Boulder for participants in the Ready-to-Work program will open this summer, and McDevitt said that should also relieve pressure on day services, as several dozen more people will have jobs during the day, as well as a place to sleep at night.

But the issue of a place for homeless people to simply exist during the day remained.

"For many of our guests, the important issue is that there is a designated place to be," said Bill Sweeney, director of BOHO. "The Bridge House exists, but it's pretty tight. It's not quite right to say to someone that there is a place you are allowed to be and your presence is welcome, when they know that when they get there, they won't even be able to walk in until someone else walks out."

The same churches and synagogues that host BOHO's emergency overnight shelter also have hosted day shelters on very cold Saturdays and federal holidays, when Bridge House and public buildings are closed.

Sweeney said that led to the idea of asking the churches to host day shelter on a more permanent basis.

"In a different world with unlimited resources and a different political environment, we might do something else, but we are where we are," he said. "It's a way to get to a solution."

The various downtown congregations are in the process of determining whether they have appropriate space available and what commitments they can make.

'We want to be partners'

Jason Hays, associate minister at First Congregational Church, said his church, as Bridge House's landlord, is very aware of the need for space. The challenge is that each church's community space is already used by a variety of groups during the day, from 12-step meetings to nonprofit boards.

"We're strong supporters of the BOHO program, and we're happy to host at night," he said. "And we're very interested in exploring this possibility. We want to be partners in this solution. We're downtown neighbors. We're committed to helping people find safe places to stay.

"Any time a congregation opens their space to the outside community, there are conversations about how to do that with compassion and appropriate boundaries. We're interested in finding ways to make it work."

Hays said his church and many of the downtown congregations see their buildings as community assets that have a role to play in solving community problems.

"The downtown churches can't do it alone," he said. "For me, the question is, 'How do we leverage the current assets that Boulder has as efficiently as possible?' That includes public buildings and community spaces and the churches. There have been challenges, especially for Bridge House, to find a location for the day shelter. We're trying to find the best solution given the limited realities of what's on the ground."

McDevitt said expanding day services will take more money. The three organizations are still looking at all the costs, but early estimates put the amount around $200,000 a year in additional operating costs.

McDevitt said the organizations are talking with their private funders, but the hope is that the city will also put money into the day services expansion.

"This needs to be a coordinated effort with city support," she said. "We want the city support to be reflected in the sustainability of the model."

'We can use this as a springboard'

Karen Rahn, executive director of Boulder's Human Services department, said there are "good ideas" in the collaborative's proposal, and the city is analyzing it.

"We're evaluating their proposals a little more in depth, and if we think it aligns with what we think are best practices and our goals," she said.

Boulder plans to convene its own task force on homeless issues this summer. Rahn said other ideas might come from that group, which will include representatives from beyond just the service providers.

"We can use this as a springboard and a basis for launching the broader community group to look at these recommendations and maybe add some," she said.

One thing the collaborative is not proposing is year-round overnight shelter, which some homeless advocates have sought.

Boulder's homeless population increases in the summer as people on the traveler circuit move through the city.

McDevitt said "community concern around the summer population" makes year-round shelter politically challenging, but year-round shelter also doesn't fit well with the collaborative's goals.

"It's all about resources," she said. "There are other places on the continuum that it made more sense to expand resources."

The goals of the collaborative are that "nobody freeze" and "nobody starve," but also that they don't "enable a homeless lifestyle" and that people engage more with services and reach their full potential, even if that's limited by mental illness, addiction or other challenges.

"We want to help people progress, and emergency summer beds don't meet those goals," she said.

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere