LOS ANGELES — Early-season results suggested that the formula to upset No. 22 Southern California is to hang with the Trojans deep into the second half and then wear down a USC roster thinned by three years of NCAA sanctions. Even Colorado coach Mike MacIntyre referred to that scenario during the week.

Evidently, CU’s plan Saturday did not include Trojans junior quarterback Cody Kessler throwing four touchdown strikes in the first quarter before the Buffaloes’ offense had time to work up a sweat.

Riddling the Colorado secondary with downfield throws all afternoon in the Trojans’ 56-28 romp, Kessler set a single-game school record with his seventh touchdown pass — a 24-yarder to wide receiver Steven Mitchell midway through the third quarter.

That put Southern California up 49-14. But the Trojans had been cruising much earlier.

“It was definitely an ugly first half,” MacIntyre said.

In establishing the new mark, Kessler broke a tie with multiple Trojans, including former USC star Matt Barkley, who burned the Buffaloes for six touchdown passes in 2012.

“He was too good today,” MacIntyre said of Kessler. “They were able to get things on the play-action today.”

A crowd of 74,756 at the historic Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum watched Southern California (5-2, 4-1 Pac-12) remain atop the Pac-12’s South Division standings.

Well into its fourth year as a member of the Pac-12, Colorado (2-5, 0-4 Pac-12) is still trying to gain traction in the pass-happy league. CU appeared to make some strides in recent weeks, losing at California in double overtime and then by five points to Oregon State.

But this one resembled blowout losses by the Buffs in 2013.

Just 14 minutes into the game, Southern California was up 28-0 and already had 210 yards of offense after the first quarter.

“We took all the steps in the right direction the last two games,” said Colorado junior wide receiver Nelson Spruce. “But we came out flat today. The bye week hurt us.”

Colorado was in a giving mood. The Buffaloes committed two defensive penalties on the game’s opening possession that helped USC march 84 yards in 10 plays — capped by a 16-yard touchdown pass from Kessler to Nelson Agholor, a fleet junior who would pull off a hat trick with three TD receptions, capped by a 75-yarder early in the third quarter.

CU’s opening offensive possession did not last nearly that long. After two nice runs by tailback Tony Jones, Colorado sophomore quarterback Sefo Liufau had his first pass attempt intercepted by Southern California’s talented sophomore safety Su’a Cravens, who darted in front of intended receiver Shay Fields for the pick.

PHOTOS: USC beats Colorado 56-28

“That’s on me,” Liufau said. “We can’t make turnovers and expect to win.”

The Trojans needed just six plays to make it 14-0 on another TD pass to Agholor. Colorado desperately needed a defensive stop and got it with a three-and-out. Or so it seemed. But safety Marques Mosley ran into the punter, USC retained possession and got another TD pass from Kessler.

Mercifully for Colorado, Kessler’s day ended as the fourth quarter began, when he was replaced by backup quarterback Max Browne. Kessler finished 19-of-26 passing for 319 yards and seven touchdowns.

Kessler was helped by a big game on the ground from junior running back Javorius “Buck” Allen, who gained 128 yards on just 15 carries, with a touchdown.

Highlights were few for CU. But Spruce did catch his 11th touchdown pass of 2014. The 5-yarder in the third quarter tied CU’s single-season record set in 2003 by Derek McCoy.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Game balls

1. Cody Kessler, QB, Southern California — The junior passed for seven touchdowns and 319 yards — in three quarters before taking the rest of the game off.

2. Nelson Agholor, WR, Southern California — His 75-yard TD reception early in the third quarter was his third score of the day. NFL scouts, no doubt, took note.

3. Southern California defense — Led by defensive end Leonard Williams and safety Su’A Cravens, the Trojans made life miserable for the Buffaloes.

Tom Kensler, The Denver Post