FOREIGN INVESTMENT: A woman walked past a barricade in Kiev, Ukraine, Wednesday. Russia lavished Ukraine with a bailout package worth at least $20 billion Tuesday, trumping the West in a Cold War-tinged struggle that keeps the former Soviet republic in Moscow's orbit. Gleb Garanich/Reuters …

GETTING OUT: People helped a survivor at the site of an airstrike in Aleppo, Syria, Wednesday. Saad Abobrahim/Reuters …

BACK HOME: Men arrived with a coffin containing the body of their friend, Buddiram Tharu, at an airport in Katmandu, Nepal, Wednesday. Mr. Buddiram went to Qatar as a migrant worker in Jun 2012 and died in December after a heart attack. Narendra Shrestha/European Pressphoto Agency …

TAKING SHELTER: A woman held a child on Wednesday in São Paulo, Brazil. Zuma 24 …

JUST A PECK: Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte kissed the hand of the Dutch parliament's chamber chairwoman Anouchka van Miltenburg before the start of a debate in The Hague, Netherlands, Wednesday. Martijn Beekman/European Pressphoto Agency …

VARIABLE LIGHT: A still image taken on Wednesday from a NASA movie of the sun shows a wide range of light wavelengths able to be detected by NASA's Solar Dynamics Observatory. NASA /Eyevine/Zuma Press …

PATIENCE: People waited in line to receive groceries on Wednesday in Miami. The Latin American Chamber of Commerce had handed out vouchers for groceries for the holidays. Joe Raedle/Getty Images …

MORE VIOLENCE: People sought refuge in Juba, South Sudan, Wednesday. South Sudan's government said it had quelled the fighting in the capital that killed hundreds of people this week, but more violence flared further north Wednesday in a new test of the leadership's control over the young and fractious state. AFP/Getty Images …

GROUND COVER: Workers of Anganwadi, a government-sponsored group for families, sat and blocked traffic during a protest in Bhubaneswar, India, Wednesday. The workers were demanding an increase in their salaries and job security. Biswaranjan Rout/Associated Press …

MAKING HIS WAY: A man dragged a stone chained to his ankle during a pilgrimage to a shrine in El Rincon, Cuba, Monday. Every year, thousands of Cubans flock to the shrine to pay homage on the feast of St. Lazarus. Ramon Espinosa/Associated Press …

PLANE CRASH: Investigators surveyed the scene where a small aircraft crashed on Tuesday in Atlanta. The two people on the plane were killed, an Atlanta Fire Rescue spokesperson said. Ben Gray/Atlanta Journal-Constitution/Associated Press …

NEW FACES: Bank of England's Victoria Cleland, right, and Mark Cornelius carried posters showing the design of new bank notes in London on Wednesday. Dylan Martinez/Associated Press …

ATTENTIVE: A security guard stood outside the U.S. embassy in New Delhi on Wednesday. Anindito Mukherjee/Reuters …