While Exelon talks a lot about shuttering financially struggling power plants, the state's other big power generator actually is doing so.

Dynegy, Illinois' second largest power generator with 13 plants mostly located downstate employing a total of 1,400, today announced plans to retire 30 percent of the power-generation capacity in Southern Illinois.

Specifically, the Houston-based company said it would shut down two coal-fired units at its Baldwin Power Station in downstate Baldwin and one coal-fired unit at Newton Power Station. The units combined generate up to 1,835 megawatts—roughly equivalent to one of Exelon's mammoth dual-unit nuclear plants.

About 190 plant jobs will be eliminated as a result, a Dynegy spokesman said.

But the plants indirectly support thousands more jobs and $1 billion in economic activity annually, Dynegy said.

The closures will take place over the next year, Dynegy announced. Last year, the company announced plans to retire its 465-megawatt Wood River station, which is expected to happen next month.

Combined, all the closures account for about 30 percent of downstate capacity.

In a release, Dynegy CEO Robert Flexon said power plants in downstate Illinois can't recover their operating costs, given persistently low wholesale power prices and the downstate grid operator's market design that prevents recovery of costs through payments to keep plants available during high-demand periods.

Flexon called on Illinois policymakers to address market problems that are threatening more closures in the future.

“Resolution of this issue in a way that serves Illinois as a whole can only be achieved with the immediate help and leadership of the Illinois state government for which we believe we have solutions, and we urgently need an audience,” Flexon said.

He held open the possibility that the closures could be reversed if unspecified state actions take place.

In recent times, Dynegy has floated the idea of placing downstate Illinois within the regional grid that holds most of Exelon's nukes in Northern Illinois. That grid—PJM Interconnection—provides much higher “capacity” payments to power plants that pledge to produce during the highest-demand times of the year than the downstate grid.

Exelon, of course, has problems of its own and has threatened to close its downstate Clinton nuclear plant without state financial help.

For now, there's been little movement in Springfield on the growing energy-related problems, given how consumed the state capital is with the budget impasse between Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and Democratic leaders in the Legislature.

Dynegy's actions have the potential to kick-start a debate that has barely begun. In addition to the controversy over “bailouts” for power plants supposed to operate in a competitive market, environmentalists and renewable power producers are at odds with Exelon over revamping the state's renewable energy law.

Very little new wind and solar development in Illinois has taken place in recent years due to technical issues with that law, which is aimed at gradually consuming more clean power in the state over time.