Reality star Nene Leakes was treated for blood clots in her lungs, a condition more commonly referred to as pulmonary embolism.

Reality star Nene Leakes was treated for blood clots in her lungs, a condition more commonly referred to as pulmonary embolism. Twitter: @NeneLeakes

Real Housewives of Atlanta star, Nene Leakes, 45, was hospitalized on Monday after doctors discovered blood clots in her lungs. The condition that Leakes described in a short post on her blog may be pulmonary embolism.

“Late last week I wasn’t feeling well, and was feeling a little short of breath. I know my body and I know when I should be concerned so I went to the hospital to get checked out,” she wrote. “After some routine tests, I was diagnosed with blood clots in my lung. I’m told this happened to me because of the constant traveling around the country that I do for my job.”

Blood clots in the lungs are commonly referred to as pulmonary embolism. Though anyone can get the condition, people who travel a lot, have a family history of blood clots, smoke, or are overweight are at a heightened risk for pulmonary embolism. Symptoms of pulmonary embolism include shortness of breath, chest pain, and bloody cough. Wheezing, leg swelling, excessive sweating, and lightheadedness are symptoms that have also been linked to the condition.

Pulmonary embolism can be deadly, so it was important that Leakes sought treatment as soon as she realized something was wrong. Early treatment can be taken in the form of medications that dissolve the clots before they get worse. But if the condition progresses too far before a patient sees a doctor, clot removal surgery may be recommended.

“The doctor advised me that most people don’t recognize the symptoms of blood clots and don’t go to the doctor,” wrote Leakes. “That’s when the big problems start happening.”

Leakes’ fans initially grew concerned when the reality television star tweeted a photo of herself in a hospital bed Monday with the caption “my arms are hurting with these IV’s.” But since receiving treatment, she is home relaxing and relieved that the ordeal is over.

“I’m blessed to be home with my wonderful husband and family!” she concluded.