President Barack Obama has nominated Sylvia Mathews Burwell to replace pro-abortion HSH Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, who resigned Thursday as the head of the agency charged with implementing Obamacare.

Obama’s nominee to replace the abortion proponent is another pro-abortion activist.

Burwell was previously the president of the Global Development Program of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. She was Chief Operating Officer and Executive Director of the Foundation prior to its reorganization in 2006 and worked at the pro-abortion foundation from 2001 to 2012.

Burwell has also been involved in campaigns for pro-abortion candidates, including working on the Dukakis/Bentsen and the Clinton/Gore campaigns and she served as Deputy Chief of Staff to pro-abortion President Bill Clinton from 1997 to 1998.

The Gates Foundation operated by Bill and Melinda Gates supports abortion and the Planned Parenthood abortion business. The Gates Foundation has given the Planned Parenthood Federation of America abortion business almost $12.5 million since 1998, including funds to persuade teenagers to support abortion and to lobby the United Nations to advance pro-abortion proposals.

The Gates foundation has also given nearly $21 million to the International Planned Parenthood abortion business over the last seven years. The funds have gone to promote abortions in third-world nations and to set up pro-abortion family planning centers in South America, Africa and eastern European nations.

Like this pro-life news article? Please support LifeNews with a donation during our April fundraising campaign!

The Gates Foundation’s “No Controversy” campaign quickly became controversial because of its links to abortion. Critics pointed out the organizations chosen to implement the efforts were primarily abortion promoters. Among them are abortion giant Planned Parenthood and the United Nations Population Fund, which are linked with coercive population control programs in China and elsewhere.

In 2012, Melinda Gates was criticized for promoting abortion and population control at an international meeting.

The same year, she was criticized for hosting a Family Planning Summit in London with two of the biggest pro-abortion groups in the world, the UN Population Fund and International Planned Parenthood Federation.