– Realty Mogul

At my startup, we worry that we have a gender imbalance. Specifically, after a recent hiring round, we’ve been asking ourselves a question more startups should eventually have to consider: Do we have too many women on staff?

Gender imbalance—and in fact, diversity at large—is a problem that’s especially easy for startups to tackle on a micro level. We’ve had conversations about diversity from day one, embracing the obvious advantage that startups are blank slates.

On our team of 36, we have people of a dozen different ethnicities, young and old, various religious backgrounds and varying life experiences. Two of our four top executives are women, including our head of production. We have 12 female employees in total. We mean it when we say that we’re an equal opportunity employer. When you start a company, you have the luxury of building a team from the ground up. Embrace and use it to your advantage. You may not get another opportunity to staff up from zero.

Before I founded a real estate crowdfunding platform, I worked in corporate finance. Though both sectors are working to correct it, financial services and technology are still known for a significant gender imbalance. At legacy financial institutions and major technology firms, the problems are often deeply entrenched. It’s not that it’s a struggle to hire qualified women, the problem is also how to best integrate women into a corporate culture that has, historically, been male-dominated.

Startups don’t inherit the same problems, and the best young companies are poised to be an integral part of the solution going forward. Growing companies can think strategically about the talent they bring on board to ensure the distribution starts to level out between competent men and women, from the beginning.

When we hired our seven summer interns, we sought out motivated people, regardless of their background or gender. They came from local universities as well as law schools and MBA programs. I know, for example, that women aren’t always exposed to finance and technology early in their education or professional lives. The three female interns we brought on board had no experience in real estate, finance or technology. Our managers were eager to take on a team of enthusiastic, execution-focused interns, and to spend the time assigning discrete tasks. That is, after all, the mutually beneficial reason to hire interns: to teach them practical skills so they can eventually become full-fledged members of your team. The result is a highly motivated team we will dearly miss when they move on. But other companies will benefit from the talent we’ve cultivated, the same way we benefit when new hires come to us from challenging previous positions. It’s all part of building a better ecosystem.

There are, of course, other ways to encourage women’s participation in startups and serve as a role model to women rising up the ranks. This fall, I’m sitting on the CEO panel at the Chick Launcher competition, an annual pitch event for women-led startups seeking venture funding. Participating in these kinds of events is one way I work to support other women working on innovative, disruptive technologies that I feel have merit and the potential to change an entire industry.

When it comes to tackling the gender imbalance in financial services and technology, I start with my own company before looking at the bigger picture. I’m able to set an example just by building the best possible team.

And the answer, by the way, is no, we do not have too many women.

Ms. Helman is co-founder and CEO of Realty Mogul, a real estate crowdfunding platform.

Follow @JillieneHelman



Follow @WSJstartup