On Meet The Press today, warmonger and Iraq war liar Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) called Obama Sec. of State John Kerry’s foreign policy outlook delusional.

Video:

Transcript:

DAVID GREGORY: When you see a ground operation moving in this direction, and you see, again, an operation that may be resulting in heavier Israeli casualties, what do you think that means? Do you have any words of caution for Israel at this point? Do you think the government, do you think the administration will seek to caution Israel? SEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I hope not. My only words to the Israeli government and people is, “Clear it out. Close the tunnels. Shut down the rocket sites. Stay as long as you need to stay.” Over 1,500 rockets have been fired. The only reason they have as few Israeli casualties is because of iron dome. If it’s left up to Hamas, thousands of Israelis would be dead. I hope the international community will not find a moral equivalence here. To the Israeli government: Do whatever is necessary to protect your people. Stay as long as you need to say. And as to Secretary Kerry, he gave the most ridiculous and delusional summary of American foreign policy I could imagine. It scares me that he believes the world is in such good shape. America is the glue that holds the free world together. Leading from behind is not working. The world is adrift. And President Obama has become the king of indecision. His policies are failing across the globe, and they will come here soon.

Of course, Lindsey Graham is calling for more violence. This is a man who still believes that troops should still be in Iraq and Afghanistan. During his interview we heard some old time anti-Obama slurs. Graham used the classic phrase, “leading from behind,” and he even threw in a “community organizer” for good measure.

These are the same attacks that Republicans have been using for the last seven years. It’s 2007-2008 all over again. Ironically, these comments are coming from one of the congressional champions who lied us into war in Iraq. Here’s something delusional for Sen. Graham. It was delusional for Republicans to spill American blood and waste trillions of American dollars on a foolish believe that they could invade a sovereign nation and impose democracy. It is delusional that Republican members of Congress like Sen. Graham refuse to admit that they were wrong about Iraq, and they still hold to the belief that more troops could make it work.

The terms foolish and delusional best describe an opposition party that can’t see that Obama’s foreign policy is working. Even worse, they can’t see that the American people want a diplomatic foreign policy. Sen. Graham lied the country into war, and kept it in a state of war against the will of the American people, so he sees no issue with behaving the same way all around globe.

The face of foolish delusion doesn’t belong to John Kerry or Barack Obama. It belongs to Sen. Lindsey Graham.