On Saturday, April 9th a number of people gathered to walk, raise funds, and share information at the 1st Annual Autism Walk in Meridian.

Frankie Loyd and Winter Trussell have an autistic son who was born with Fragile X Syndrome which is a genetic disorder.

" It hits me in a totally different way as a parent. As a parent when your child is sick, there is nothing you can do but be there," said Trussell.

They noticed their wasn't a group locally that catered to their child's needs. They began to pull together resources and reach out to supporters and hosted the walk.

" People would always have questions and they were asking for resources, that's one reason why we put on the walk. It's not just a walk to raise funds but we also have resources, for the people who may have just found out their kid has autism or FXS .

Both disorders are typically diagnosed in the early developmental stages of childhood. The couple believes the Autism walk is to help parents and family member through each stage of childhood through adolescences.

" Once they get 18 right, they age out. There are services for them too, they are called group homes and assistant living. Their family member doesn't have to be stuck away somewhere. They can actually have somewhat of an independent life with assistant living. A lot of people don't know that," said Loyd.

By offering these resources, they want to bring hope to families that share their experience. Along with helping people in the community gain a better understanding of the disorders.

"There is a big stigma on mental health, depression, and mental illness. I don't want someone or a family member who have these disorders feel like they have to hide their children. Theses are wonderful children. I get to know them. The only people that have a problem are us, to them the world is perfect. If you can just close your eyes to what you see and open up your hearts to feel them. It's a wonderful experience," said Trussell.

There isn't a cure for these disorders yet, but treatment may help. To learn more information or join the group you can find them on Facebook at Autism Walk Meridian.