Gov. Scott Walker is seeking federal approval for Wisconsin residents to receive health care subsidies outside of the insurance markets established under the Affordable Care Act. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Madison — Gov. Scott Walker wants consumers to be able to sidestep Obamacare's online insurance market and still get subsidized coverage — and at least one of his requests to do that might get traction.

The GOP governor's push comes as the Assembly voted, 64-32, Wednesday to approve Walker's separate proposal to respond to the troubled rollout of the federal health law by waiting to drop patients off state BadgerCare Plus health care coverage. Six Democrats joined all Republicans in voting for the bill, sending it to the Senate.

Both liberals and conservatives have expressed some support for the proposal by the Walker administration to help consumers buy plans already offered through the online federal health care market directly from the insurers themselves. The idea — already being pursued by the federal government in other states — has gotten backing from prominent supporters of the law.

"Basically, our number one concern right now should be getting folks health insurance. Given the website problems, that suggests the value of a pilot of the type proposed here," Jonathan Gruber, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was deeply involved in the crafting of both the universal coverage law in Massachusetts' system and the federal Affordable Care Act.

The Walker administration actually made two requests to Kathleen Sebelius, President Barack Obama's secretary of Health and Human Services. Both would allow consumers to receive federal subsidies under the health care law without going through the online markets known as exchanges, which offer private health plans but only those that have met certain minimum standards.

Two weeks ago, Walker requested that consumers be allowed to use the federal subsidies to buy any health plan offered in Wisconsin. That request, which would represent a substantial change of policy for the Affordable Care Act, is unlikely to win approval from the Obama administration.

But Monday, Wisconsin's insurance commissioner, Ted Nickel, also asked the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to include Wisconsin in a pilot program to help consumers go directly to insurers to buy the health insurance plans that are available through the online exchange.

This so-called direct enrollment option is included in Obamacare as it was originally written. So technically, it is already available as an option in Wisconsin and other states — it just hasn't been used much here and elsewhere because of the larger federal computer problems.

To make direct enrollment more viable, the federal government is working on fixing the computer bugs and also launched pilot programs last month in Florida, Ohio and Texas. That makes it at least more plausible that Wisconsin might in time join those three states.

"Under the new pilot program being launched, issuers utilizing direct enrollment in these three states will provide detailed feedback on their experiences to feed into our real-time work to make improvements for both consumers and issuers," Julie Bataille, a spokeswoman for the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, said last month of the pilot program.

J.P. Wieske, a spokesman for the Wisconsin insurance commissioner, said that both Walker administration proposals make sense given the ongoing computer problems in the federal exchanges.

He dismissed concerns that allowing direct enrollment with private insurers might further complicate the already tangled knot of computer problems around the federal health law. Wieske said the federal exchanges already have to interact with the private insurers' computer systems.

"Given that it's not working and (consumers) were promised subsidies, there's got to be a better way," Wieske said of the current situation.

A spokeswoman in Chicago for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services had no comment on the Walker administration requests.

Gruber, the Massachusetts economist, said he agreed with the plan of allowing consumers — for at least the next year — to go directly to insurers to buy the same coverage offered under the federal exchanges.

But Gruber said he didn't agree with the larger proposal by Walker to allow consumers to use the federal subsidies to buy health policies not offered on the exchanges.

Gruber said the point of the exchange and its more limited coverage choices is to ensure that everyone gets robust insurance and that the market is financially sustainable.

"Right now, the Wisconsin insurance market is highly discriminatory, with young and healthy folks able to get products at low prices and older and sicker folks left out of the system. A primary goal of the ACA is to remedy this...But that can raise average prices as the (insurance) pool gets sicker," Gruber said. "If the young and healthy can use the tax credit to stay out of the reformed insurance market, then it will worsen the price increase in that market."

But Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) said he liked both Walker administration proposals and especially favored the larger one giving consumers the greatest number of options.

"I like that even better. More choice is good," Vos said.

On a related note, Republicans said Wednesday that the separate BadgerCare Plus delay approved by the Assembly is a fiscally sound response to the troubled rollout of the federal exchanges.

Vos said that Wisconsin Republicans kept "our word but the president didn't keep his" on health care.

"The only criticism I will take is that we believed the president," Vos said in a news conference before the debate.

Democrats contend the GOP plan offers a "false choice" because it would prevent 83,000 of the state's poorest residents from securing BadgerCare Medicaid benefits for another three months. Unlike the plans of some other GOP governors, Democrats said this approach would also fail to save state taxpayers by declining extra federal money available for Medicaid under the health care law.

Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca (D-Kenosha) said that state leaders had a moral responsibility to keep their promises to the uninsured.

"Wisconsin will be far better off if you take the federal health care money. This is about life and death for some people," Barca said.

Walker and other Republicans say that the federal government can't be trusted for the long term to pay for an expanded Medicaid program. Democrats respond that the federal government can be reasonably expected to hold up that commitment for the next three months.

Democrats do support another provision of the plan that would delay until April 1 the dropping of a separate group of 72,000 people off BadgerCare. For that reason, some Democrats voted for the proposal despite their criticism of it.

The Joint Finance Committee on Monday approved the bill, 11-2, with Rep. Jon Richards (D-Milwaukee) joining all Republicans in support of the measure.

Rodriguez sworn in

Also Wednesday, state Rep. Jessie Rodriguez was sworn in as the Legislature's second Latina lawmaker and the first GOP legislator from the fast-growing demographic.

The Franklin resident, who worked as an outreach coordinator for the school vouchers group Hispanics for School Choice, immediately took a prominent place in the chamber just one row behind the body's top leaders.

Rodriguez, an immigrant from El Salvador, defeated Democrat Elizabeth Coppola last month in a special election for the 21st District Assembly seat vacated by former Rep. Mark Honadel (R-South Milwaukee). Rodriguez's husband, Aaron, who was present for the swearing in, writes an opinion blog for the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

Also Wednesday, Rep. Bob Kulp (R-Stratford) was sworn in after he won the other special election scheduled last month. That leaves the Assembly with 59 Republicans, 39 Democrats, and one open seat.