The 25-year-old heart transplant program at Sentara Norfolk General celebrated its 356th patient transplant this month.

At a recent gathering of 30 transplant recipients, Carey McGrath of Courtland marked 24 years since his operation. He returned to work seven weeks after the transplant and just recently filed for retirement. He is now a grandparent.

Currently there are 13 patients who are so sick they are at the highest priority level for transplant, according to Sentara. "Our list is three times as long as it was a few years ago," said John Herre, M.D., a cardiologist with the program. "There's a huge shortage of donors that may not get any better, so mechanical circulatory support may have to be the solution for many patients in the future."

Sentara Health offers mechanical support including left ventricular-assist devices (L-VADs) and the SynCardia total artificial heart, which can serve as a bridge to transplant, or potentially as lifelong therapy. "It may become an option patients choose," Herre said in a Sentara news release.

Sentara Cardiology and Heart Surgery is in its 14th year in the Top 50 in U.S. News and World Report rankings. For more information on Sentara heart programs, go to http://www.sentara.com.

Bon Secours heart care

Bon Secours Heart & Vascular Institute's surgeons are using the SternaLock Blu Primary Closure System instead of stainless steel wires to close the sternum after open-heart surgery.

"We hope that this new system will help our patients heal more quickly and comfortably after open-heart surgery," Robert Lancey, cardiothoracic surgeon at Bon Secours Maryview Medical Center in Portsmouth, said in a Bon Secours blog post.

The new system is stronger, keeps the bones closer together and reduces movement.

To learn more about cardiothoracic surgery at Bon Secours Heart & Vascular Institute, visit http://www.bshr.com/heart.

ACA deadline

Monday, Dec. 15, is the deadline for consumers to sign up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act's insurance marketplace, http://www.healthcare.gov, for coverage effective Jan. 1, 2015.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe reported Monday that more than 4,000 Virginians received individual help with enrollment in the first two weeks of the open enrollment period. Thousands more have visited the CoverVa.org website, which helps consumers determine if they're eligible for Medicaid or for marketplace subsidies. (It set a one-day record of 5,127 visitors on Dec. 3).

McAuliffe has set a goal of adding 160,000 Virginians to health insurance through Virginia's federally facilitated marketplace, http://www.healthcare.gov, by the end of the enrollment period on Feb. 15, for coverage starting March 1. Enrollment in FAMIS, children's health insurance, has increased by 4,000 since Sept. 1. Of those, more than 1,200 received one-on-one assistance, the governor's office reported.

Last year Virginia had few resources for hands-on help in enrollment; this year, thanks to a federal grant, it has hired 100 new enrollment assisters to give in-person help. All such help, whether by navigators, certified application counselors or enrollment assisters is provided free of charge. Assisters do not choose plans for consumers, but help with eligibility, understanding the system, and showing how to compare insurance plans.

In the first two weeks, Enroll Virginia helped 1,754 people; 6,000 were helped through outreach and events; and the Virginia Community Healthcare Association reported that it had helped 2,300 people, contacted another 2,000, and held 100 outreach events.

For assistance, consumers can call 1-800-318-2596, or go to localhelp.healthcare.gov and enter a ZIP code to find the closest in-person assistance.

•Monday, Dec. 15 is the deadline to update profiles for those who enrolled last year; failure to update information could result in additional monthly fees or higher premium as those who don't shop for a new plan will be automatically re-enrolled.

•Enrollfest events with education and enrollment help will be held on Monday, Dec. 15, from 4-7 p.m., at Boo Williams Sportsplex, 5 Armistead Pointe Parkway, Hampton; and at First Baptist Murray Center, 455 E. Brambleton Ave., Norfolk.

For information, call 757-287-0277 or visit http://www.celebratehealthcare.net.

More online

Follow the blog at dailypress.com/healthnotes. Find more health news at dailypress.com/health; on Twitter @dphealthnotes or on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/dphealth. Sign up for a free weekly health e-letter, The Health Report, at dailypress.com/services/newsletter/register/.