The Eye

Drake New Girlfriend Rumors 2014: Skylar Diggins SPARKS Dating Frenzy With Kiss During ESPYs [INSTAGRAM PICS] 'Believe Me' BFF Nicki Minaj Jealous?

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Kevin Winter/Getty Images) ESPYs host Drake with WNBA player Skylar Diggins onstage during the 2014 ESPYS at Nokia Theatre L.A. Live on July 16, 2014 in Los Angeles, California.

Drake and Skylar Diggins had no problem showing some PDA during the 2014 ESPYs as new dating rumors continue to flourish.



The 27-year-old rapper tried to get as cozy as possible to the 23-year-old WNBA star while hosting the ESPYs on ESPN on Wednesday night.















It’s no secret that Drake is completely smitten with Diggins, who already has a steady boyfriend.



Drake tried to woo Diggins by reading a poem titled “Can I Dig In?” She basically shot him down, called him crazy and made a deal that if she kissed him one time he would leave her alone once and for all.















So that’s exactly what happened. She gave him a kiss right on the forehead.



















Drake is known for posting pictures of Diggins on his Instagram.





Rumors went ballistic when Drake a posted a picture on his Instagram of him wearing a yellow shirt with Diggins' basketball number and her name on the back.







"Feeling truly blessed today. Been down and I'm grateful to be on my feet in this wonderful weather with wonderful people," Drake captioned the photo.



According to Beauty World News, fans thought that Drake was trying to break up Diggins and her longtime boyfriend Daniel Smith. But Drake's friend, OB O'Brien, said it wasn't true at all.



Back in May, Drake posted photos of Diggins on his Instagram, fueling dating rumors back then as well.











Diggins and Drake would definitely make a cute couple, but it’s too bad Diggins already has someone.



Young Money fans though think Drake and his bestie Nicki Minaj should give a shot at dating though.



Drake posted some photos of him and the 31-year-old rapper performing together on his Instagram back in June.















And it looks like Minaj knows Drake very well, so well that she knows what kind of woman he likes.

"I think what works with Drake is if you act like you don't like him," said Minaj on U.K.'s Capital Xtra in the Morning show on Tuesday, June 23.



Read the latest Drake news HERE.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.