Are Barack Obama and John Kasich BFFs? Is Charlie Earl a game-changer? Is Mike Bell an outlier? Today's Ohio Politics Roundup has a forkful of 2014 and a spoonful of presidential politics.

President Barack Obama's kind words last week for Ohio Gov. John Kasich have not gone unnoticed by conservatives. And while we've described the dynamic as blowing kisses in the name of political gamesmanship, Laura Ingraham sees it more as snuggling.

"Governor," Ingraham said Friday night while interviewing Kasich on Fox News, "you guys are tight now. You guys are practically spooning, you and President Obama. I mean, gosh, that’s amazing. Are you BFF’s [best friends forever] for real?"

Obama's shoutout is aimed at Kasich's embrace of Medicaid expansion. Ingraham noted in the interview that expansion is one part of Obama's Affordable Care Act not inviting scrutiny as questions and criticism persist over the program's messy debut.

Kasich, a Republican facing a re-election challenge from the right in 2014, laughed off Ingraham's suggestion that he was palling around with a Democratic president. He reiterated his opposition to the program known as Obamacare but, as he has before, argued that the federal money being sent to expand Medicaid belongs to Ohio.

"Isn't that a little bit tricky?" Ingraham asked.

"You know very well, Laura, that if I don’t bring Ohio money back, they're not going to put it in a piggybank," Kasich replied. "And I think its critical that we’re able to help people to help themselves to get them to work. … Conservatism means that you help people so they can help themselves and so they can enter in the economic strength of our country."

You can watch the video below.



Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

Where Ohio's race for governor ranks

The looming contest between Kasich and Democratic Cuyahoga County Executive Ed FitzGerald moved up a spot on The Fix's top 15 gubernatorial races for 2014. The Washington Post blog ranks the race eighth, between Colorado and South Carolina.

The Fix noted the "bipartisan love" Kasich received last week from Obama.

So if you're scoring at home: blown kisses, spooning and love.

We don't want to know what's next.

What about Charlie Earl?



But where does the likely Libertarian candidate for governor fit into all of this? As mentioned, Charlie Earl plans to run to the right of Kasich and hammer him on Medicaid expansion. That could tip the race to FitzGerald -- if Earl can get on the ballot.

And that's going to be harder now, thanks to a new bill that critics have dubbed "The John Kasich Re-Election Protection Act. As Northeast Ohio Media Group's Jeremy Pelzer explains, the Libertarians should be fine, but they may have to burn money and resources in their effort to qualify for the ballot. That could dilute the party's impact next November.



Unions see Toledo as 2014 harbinger



Organized labor is on a victory lap after Toledo Mayor Mike Bell's re-election loss.

And labor leader believe it's a sign of things to come for Kasich in 2014, writes John Seewer of the Associated Press. Bell, an independent, campaigned in support of Kasich-backed restrictions on collective bargaining in 2011. But voters overwhelmingly repealed the measure at the ballot box. “A lot of what our membership responded to was that Mayor Bell aligned himself so closely with Gov. Kasich,” one labor leader told AP.

Bell reflects

As for Bell, the Toledo Blade's Ignazio Messina does an exit interview with the outgoing mayor, who said he feels "liberated." Messina also talks to others about Bell's legacy.

Lots of blue



Finally, here's a cool map from Northeast Ohio Media Group's Rich Exner, who peers into Cuyahoga County villages and cities to analyze the politics of a deep-blue region.

Note the red on the corners. And be sure to check out Exner's look at how each municipality voted in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections.