The U.S.’s controversial phone surveillance program has finally come to an end over the weekend. For years, the NSA has collected phone records en masse, archiving everyone’s calls to check them for suspicious activity. After being deemed unconstitutional earlier this year, Congress finally shut down this shady program.

Congress passed a law to end the program back in June, but gave the NSA 6 months to “phase out” of its current system, a deadline that arrived at 11:59 p.m. this past Saturday. Moving forward, telephone service providers will maintain these records instead of the government. The NSA and law enforcement agencies can still access this data from the companies after securing a court order. If a judge agrees that surveillance is warranted for a specific person, the NSA can track who Americans are calling for up to a six month period.

Though the program has been in place thanks to the Patriot Act after the attacks on September 11, it didn’t receive national scrutiny until whistleblower Edward Snowden leaked documents revealing the extent of these programs. A dialogue about whether citizens’ privacy concerns should trump safety measures has ensued ever since.

Senator Ron Wyden, a Democrat representing Oregon, has taken a leadership role in putting a stop to bulk phone record collection. “This is a victory for everyone who believes in protecting both American security and American’s constitutional rights,” he said.

Not all legislators are as excited as Sen. Wyden, however. In light of the recent terrorist attacks in Paris, some U.S. lawmakers think now is not the time to decrease the amount of government surveillance. The head of the Senate Intelligence Committee, Senator Richard Burr, said, “Anytime you can take electronics and use those selectors, it’s beneficial to the world’s intelligence community… the United States made a real mistake when they eliminated this program.” The Republican from North Carolina is part of a group hoping to give the program at least a temporary extension.

However, one main reason why the program has ultimately been scrapped is that it never actually helped prevent terrorist activity in the first place. By the government’s own reluctant admission, bulk data collection did not provide the U.S. with information to thwart a single terrorist attack, making all this effort not just unconstitutional, but also pointless.

While it’s certainly a step in the right direction, opponents of government surveillance should realize that the fight is far from over. The new law in no way hampers the NSA from continuing to conduct mass data collection on Internet browsing and social media accounts, so remain wary that Big Brother may be monitoring your internet activity.

Photo credit: Thinkstock