Photo

To the Editor:

David Brooks (“The Moral Injury,” column, Feb. 17) captures the anguish of post-traumatic stress disorder well. But he does a disservice to those with PTSD when he tries to collapse it into moral injury. Natural disasters are a major cause of PTSD, though rape is the cause most likely to provoke it.

Moral injury is a personal agency response to violating one’s own moral code. It can be experienced without PTSD, and results in a loss of faith or meaning, shame, grief and isolation. Committing an atrocity has the worst effect because it violates even the military moral code for soldiers, but just surviving when others do not can lead to profound guilt.

Only a fourth of Afghanistan and Iraq war veterans receive treatment for PTSD, but many more endure moral injury alone in a society oblivious to their suffering.

Mr. Brooks is right: Veterans require more from us than a thank-you, and we would be better people if we were willing to hear harrowing things and to offer a caring presence on their journey of rebuilding a moral identity.

RITA NAKASHIMA BROCK

Fort Worth

The writer, director of the Soul Repair Center at Brite Divinity School (an affiliate of Texas Christian University), is a co-author of “Soul Repair: Recovering From Moral Injury After War.”

To the Editor:

David Brooks’s insightful and sensitive column struck a healing nerve with me. Though a registered conscientious objector, I served as an Army photographer in Vietnam, an agonizing dilemma. Writing a novel may put this trauma and the loss of a close friend to rest.

Thank you, Mr. Brooks, for an eloquent broad stroke with poignant details on enduring and healing moral wounds. If this country does not innovate and become wiser in confronting adversaries instead of making war, we will perpetuate moral injury.

ANDREW deLORY

Fremont, Calif.

To the Editor:

“The Moral Injury,” by David Brooks, was precise; the anguished details he gave of post-traumatic stress disorder cut straight to the bone of what I see in some of my college English classes. When I teach “The Things They Carried,” by Tim O’Brien, a short-story collection set during the Vietnam War, a few students who are vets ask to be excused, though some carry on with support from their counselors.

For most of us, PTSD is a vague concept meaning the painful aftereffects of war. A big step toward educating the public about the disorder, while at the same time paying tribute, would be the creation of museums around the world with veterans telling their stories.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In a similar vein, Holocaust museums made the experiences of survivors tangible to millions, while also giving survivors a way to make meaning.

The National Veterans Art Museum in Chicago is a good step in that direction. If there were more such places, they could be part of college or high school curriculums. That would be a worthwhile way to spend taxpayer money. It would be a way to move past what Mr. Brooks calls “the cheap grace of ‘thank you for your service.’ ”

SANDRA HURTES

New York

The writer is an adjunct at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice and the Borough of Manhattan Community College.

To the Editor:

David Brooks’s column is moving and educational. As a psychiatrist, I don’t think that he missed anything important in his description of post-traumatic stress disorder. But I do think that he missed one crucial moral issue involved in this “war on terror.”

In contrast to the Vietnam War, this war is conducted by volunteer soldiers, not draftees. Volunteer means mainly poorer, lower class soldiers who, though patriotic, may also be joining for career reasons.

Is it morally fair to put one segment of our young people more at risk for serving and thereby at risk for PTSD?

H. STEVEN MOFFIC

Milwaukee

To the Editor:

David Brooks, at the end of his thoughtful discussion of post-traumatic stress disorder, writes, “We live in a culture that emphasizes therapy, but trauma has to be overcome morally, through rigorous philosophical autobiography, nuanced judgment, case by case.”

Have I missed something? I thought that these laudable pursuits were therapy.

VICTOR A. ALTSHUL

New Haven

The writer is a psychiatrist.