Topics: benedict cumberbatch, Editor's Picks, Happyish, House, hugh laurie, Scrotal Recall, sherlock, TV, Entertainment News

This story has been corrected since it was originally published.

My favorite Harry Potter character is Snape. I enjoy observing the look on people’s faces when I reveal this preference. “But how can you like him?” some people ask. The reason is quite simple. I prefer characters who aren’t clearly good or evil. Give me a mix of both over a hero. We all know heroes don’t really exist.

But there’s one other reason that I adore Snape. I’m attracted to English and Scottish snark. I like assholes with a British accent. From Hugh Laurie as Dr. House to Benedict Cumberbatch as Sherlock to even Dylan Moran (not British, but Irish accents work well enough for these purposes, too) playing a misanthropic, wiseass bookstore owner in “Black Books,” I’m all about this trope.

The British “have the world’s sexiest accents,” the Guardian reported in February. This information comes from a Time Out Global Dating Survey. But I think it’s even sexier when matched with a dry wit.

So I was more than pleased to discover two new shows this season that satisfy my itch. Steve Coogan plays an unhappy middle-aged ad executive in “Happyish,” a show created by the novelist Shalom Auslander for Showtime, which just concluded its first season, with the fate of a second still up in the air. “Happyish” isn’t afraid to use a bunch of profanity and poke fun at the brands we’re inundated with (the Keebler Elves and the Geico Gecko, for instance.) The writing really shines in the moments when Coogan delivers his negative views on the world:

“It’s the Prozac. It’s a hard-on killer,” he tells his wife while they’re in bed.

“Try some Viagra,” she suggests.

“I’m worried that the Viagra will interfere with the Prozac. That’s life. I’m either soft and happy, or miserable and hard.”

Give me the miserable and hard any day of the week. Or the completely ridiculous manchild I wouldn’t be attracted to if he had an American accent. Another 2015 debut with the worst title ever, Netflix’s “Scrotal Recall” is a charming romantic comedy about a man who discovers he has chlamydia, and is forced to go through his list of all of the women he has slept with in order to inform them. The show flashes between the present and the past, and it’s addictive in a tender way. Dylan’s friend Luke is silly, a bit of a commitment-phobe, and reminiscent of Will Arnett’s charmingly oblivious character, G.O.B., in “Arrested Development.” He’s sexy in his complete lack of self-awareness. I find that trait infuriating in American men, but it works when the guy sounds posh. Most importantly: he makes me laugh. One of the best moments in the show is when he reenacts “Point Break” in a moment of unfiltered enthusiasm.