Those who were waiting for a health policy discussion at the second of Wednesday night's two Republican presidential debates in Boulder, Colo. had to be patient -- but that patience was eventually rewarded.

At the very end of the debate, which was hosted by CNBC, the candidates were asked about their plans for reforming Medicare.

The main problem with Medicare right now is that the average person pays in taxes over their whole lifetime about $100,000, but the average person takes out about $350,000," said Sen. Rand Paul, MD (R-Ky.), an ophthalmologic surgeon. "We have this enormous mismatch because we have smaller and smaller families."

"When people ask me 'Whose fault is it that Medicare's broke and out of money?', I say, 'Look, it's not the Republicans' fault; it's not the Democrats' fault; it's your grandparents' fault for having too many damn kids," he continued. "We used to have 16 workers for one retiree, now you have three workers for one retiree. It's not working."

Paul touted his bill to fix Medicare and added, "For both Medicare and Social Security, you have to gradually raise the [eligibility] age. If you're not willing to raise the age, you're not serious about fixing either one of them."

Former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee emphasized the role that chronic diseases play in increasing the cost of Medicare. "Eighty-five percent of the cost of Medicare is chronic disease," he said. "If we don't address what's costing so much, we can't throw enough money at this."

"We don't have a healthcare crisis in America; we have a health crisis," Huckabee continued. "You want to fix Medicare? Focus on the diseases that are costing us trillions of dollars -- Alzheimer's, diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. Eradicate those and you fix Medicare, you fix America and its economy, and you make people's lives a heck of a lot better."

Former Florida governor Jeb Bush said both Medicare and Social Security needed reforming. "You can't just allow [them] to continue on [their] current path, because there will be major reductions in benefits in the next decade if we do nothing," he said. "I have a concrete plan to do just that; it allows people to keep health savings accounts to encourage savings."

Real estate magnate Donald Trump suggested that economic prosperity was the key to solving the Medicare cost problem. "We're going to bring jobs and manufacturing back [from foreign countries]; we're going to cut costs; we're going to save Social Security and we're going to save Medicare."

But Bush said he didn't think improving the economy would be enough. "I have a plan to grow the economy at 4%, but you're still going to have to make adjustments to both Medicare and Social Security."

Ohio governor John Kasich pointed to his success in reducing Medicaid costs in his state. "We took Medicaid ... from a 10% growth rate to 2.5% without taking one person off the rolls or cutting one single benefit" by doing thing such as forcing competition, using technology, and taking on the special interest groups.

"We can take many of those same procedures, we can apply it to Medicare, we can make a stronger program, but I agree with Jeb -- you can't just do this by growing the economy, you can't grow your way out of demographics, but we can give people better healthcare," Kasich said. And in terms of healthcare, he added, "Why don't we start giving incentives to keep people healthy, rather than giving incentives to treat them when they're sick?"

Retired pediatric neurosurgeon Ben Carson, MD, discussed his plan, which includes offering Medicare beneficiaries health savings accounts. "My plan gives people the option of opting out [of traditional Medicare] but I think they'll see a very good option here," he said. "The annual Medicare budget is over $600 billion, and there are 48 million people involved ... that comes out to $12,500 for each one. I can tell you, there are a lot of private sector things you could do with $12,500 which would get you a lot more than you get from this government program."

Florida senator Marco Rubio stressed that any changes to the Medicare program wouldn't affect current beneficiaries. "My mother's on Medicare and Social Security; I'm against anything that's bad for my mother," he said. "We're talking about reforms for people like me who are years away from retirement that have a way to plan for these changes in a way that's very reasonable. It's not too much to ask of our generation after everything our parents and grandparents did for us."

There was also a little healthcare discussion in the first debate of the evening, among the four candidates who had scored lower in the polls.

"In healthcare you're seeing a lot of consolidation, and that consolidation is occurring because of Obamacare," said former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum. "You're seeing big health insurance companies fold up; you're seeing Obama try to seed health insurance companies and they've all failed, I think except for one. Why? Because we have a system of Obamacare -- minimum loss ratios that make it virtually impossible for a small insurer to operate effectively."

That was no accident, he continued. "This was deliberate, to make it so impossible for small insurers to survive that they consolidate into a small group. Then the left can say, 'Oh, there is no competition; we need single-payer.' And that's why we have to repeal Obamacare."

Former New York governor George Pataki weighed in on the vaccine issue, which was a topic during a previous Republican debate. "One of the things that troubles me about the Republican party is that too often we question science that everyone accepts," he said. "I mean, it's ridiculous that in the 21st century we're questioning whether or not vaccines are the appropriate way to go. Of course they are."