Wichita police are searching for a possible suspect after a young boy reported a man tried to get him in a van several times. It happened Saturday afternoon near 143rd and 13th in east Wichita.

The victim's father, who wants to remain anonymous, tells KAKE News that his 10-year-old son came home from a ride around the block shaking out of control with a story that would make any parent cringe.

The boy told his father that he was riding his bike around the neighborhood loop when all of a sudden a strange man pulled up next to him saying 'get in the van' several times.

The boy's father says he refused and got away only to be followed home. The boy says the man swerved in front of him in the street to try to get him to stop on last time. The 10-year-old thankfully escaped and made it home without harm. He told his dad who then called police and word quickly spread about the attempted abduction.

"The fear is," said neighbor Brad Bruner. "You don't understand why someone would do that and the fear that it could have been your kids, which my kids are older now, it could have been my grandkids. It's sickening."

Bruner lives on the block where the alleged attempted kidnapping happened. An officer came to his door looking for information.

"Police asked if we've seen a black van with tinted windows, and I had actually been outside doing landscaping and had not seen anything of suspicious," he said.

The Savannah neighborhood has dozens of kids around the same age as the victim. Bruner says he felt the need to post a warning on Facebook.

"We sent a message out to all our kids and it had been picked up by 200 people by two hours later," said Bruner.

He also says he pulled his grandchildren aside.

"We actually did say just be careful," he said. "Vehicles you don't recognize, stay away."

The alleged suspect is described as a white man with a dark goatee and a pencil beard driving a black minivan. Wichita police say they will have more information on this case Monday morning.