Sioux Falls, SD

Rod Stewart is on his way to Sioux Falls, and fans are anxiously awaiting the chance to snag the best seats.

"I have a friend, and her and her husband, another friend and her husband and we've got two other people that we are bringing, too," Lois Boone said.

"We were in back of two ladies that were going also, and we were excited to come get tickets," Jeannie Chop said.

It's a similar story with every event at the Denny Sanford PREMIER Center, from Luke Bryan to Ed Sheeran. Fans are excited to see the big acts so close to home.

"I'd say we were probably thinking in that eight to ten concert range for our projections before we opened, and we're easily going to surpass that. We're only six months into it and we've surpassed it already," SMG's Rick Huffman said.

Eleven events have already sold out since opening day, which is a big plus for such a new event center.

"The ticket sales have been just enormously strong, and so promoters see that and they like that. It's a hot market and they want to bring their shows where the hot ticket sales are," Huffman said.

It's not just ticket sales that trigger acts to look at Sioux Falls. The Denny Sanford PREMIER Center is still new, a fresh face on the concert scene.

"It's a big improvement from the Arena where we had very limited seating, so it's great that they're able to bring in these bigger-named acts," Keith Neuharth said.

The new shine won't last forever, and Huffman says they're not taking this early success for granted.

The number of events that have already played at the Denny Sanford PREMIER Center is impressive on its own, but the list isn't going to stop there.

"You just have to find the right mix, the right dates, the right price and hope for the best," Huffman said.

Huffman says they'll be riding this momentum of great ticket sales as long as they can, and if the sales continue as they are, he says there could be a chance some promoters consider offering Sioux Falls multiple shows for a big-time artist.

News

Events Center {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.