ColaDaily.com is your source for free news and information in Columbia and the Midlands.

Public libraries are transforming into 21st century information centers replete with traditional print materials and digital resources. The shift also is changing the role librarians play in helping patrons discover and access new information.

University of South Carolina graduate student Seneca Jackson is taking the lead on bridging the knowledge gap among rural and urban residents as Richland Library’s Ethel Bolden Minority Scholar.

Jackson always has been a lover of books, but he began his journey toward becoming a librarian after spending time with his middle school teacher learning how to conduct research for his assignments.

“Just by sitting at her knee, I found that I actually liked this,” he said.

Jackson graduated from the College of Charleston with a degree in political science in 2005 and went on to teach seventh-grade social studies in Denmark, South Carolina, a community that has a large Latino population.

He said that experience coupled with memories of growing up in the farming town of Swansea taught him there was a great need for rural and minority students to have access to resources to become successful.

“We have really gifted and talented students, but we aren’t able to give them what they really and truly needed, which are skills to go to high school or go off to college,” he said. “I just want to see more of them at school and understand that information is a very powerful tool to shape your future.”

Jackson decided to fulfill his passion and returned to school to earn his master’s degree in library and information science at USC. Since then, he has worked in various positions within Thomas Cooper Library on campus as a Cooper-Davis Fellow.

He also works at the Midlands Technical College library.

Jackson describes libraries as places for discovery but also as places for individuals to gain literacy. The librarian, he says, should guide patrons on their quest for information, whether it be picking up a good book or searching for a job.

“We are information gatekeepers,” Jackson said. “It’s more important for us to be open, engaging and basically just be there and help. You have to listen to them. They have an individual story of their own.”

Jackson said public libraries also extend their community outreach through partnerships with local school systems, as well as supporting the academic goals of the districts.

Richland Library’s summer reading program and Cocky Reading Express initiative are just two examples of what Jackson says are indicative of the work public libraries can do to support reading and literacy efforts found in local schools.

“I see how the libraries are engaging these kids as young as toddlers,” he said.

Seneca Jackson’s Top 5 Books Anything by Dean Koontz Frank Herbert’s “Dune” series Octavia Butler’s “Kindred” The “Harry Potter” series Anything by Danielle Steele

Mary Kate Quillivan, a studio librarian at Richland Library, said libraries are shifting toward lifelong learning.

“All libraries are the people’s universities,” she said. “We really do focus on the little kids all the way to seniors. We’re so much more than books.”

Beyond books and periodicals, local libraries are equipped with music, movies and online services for all ages, backgrounds and educational levels, according to Quillivan.

And with the addition of technology like 3-D printers, as well as film and editing equipment, Quillivan said Richland Library is stepping outside the bounds of a traditional book depository to serve a larger audience with diverse needs.

“With librarians now, it’s all about change and being fluid and listen to the individual,” she said. “As stewards of the taxpayers dollars, we really listen and adapt.”

Jackson earned the $2,500 Ethel Bolden Minority Scholarship for being one of those adaptable librarians.

From his time working at the St. Andrews branch as a community organizer for the Affordable Care Act to presenting his research on the importance of online educational tools to provide equity for student learning, Jackson was selected for his dedication to his craft.

“We feel Seneca is deserving of this scholarship because he embodies many of the qualities that Ethel exhibited. He has demonstrated true leadership, which has led to a positive impact on our local library services,” said Richland Library Foundation Chair Adam Davis. “The Richland Library Foundation is excited to help Seneca further his education and outreach in the community.”

Jackson said he hopes to inspire other minorities to become librarians. He said libraries often have very few black, male librarians and that he’d like to see the pool of talent increase.

Jackson thinks librarians are here to stay and he hopes to be one who opens a world of possibility for those who may have not stepped outside their comfort space.

“Librarians are going to be needed. There has to be somebody that has the knowledge and skills that knows what’s out there,” he said. “There’s a whole world that you can go sit in a corner and read books about, and eventually get skills and go do it on your own.”

Comments