Panel discussion to follow performance at Boulder County meeting aimed at reducing stigma

Mike Butler, public safety chief with the Longmont Police Department, talks about mental illness-related crimes in April during a community mental health forum at LifeBridge Christian Church in Longmont. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

If you go What: "A Day for Grace" When: 6:30 p.m. Wednesday. Mental health resources will be available at 5:30, and there is a discussion panel following the play. Where: Longmont High School Auditorium Cost: Free

As much as 25 percent of people will suffer some kind of mental health woes in any given year, but many of them won't get help because of the stigma attached to mental illness.

Longmont and Boulder County officials hope to change that, and after nearly a year of meetings and planning, a Wednesday event marks a kickoff for what Longmont Public Safety Chief Mike Butler sees as the beginning of new conversations about mental health.

"When you have tragedy, it can shed light on what can happen," Butler said, referring to a murder-suicide and fetal abduction that happened less than 24 hours apart last March.

Butler held a news conference a few days after the tragedies and called for greater community involvement with how mental illness is addressed and how those suffering from mental illness are received by the community.

Advertisement

"We've been more reactive in our response to crisis," Butler said. "Is there a more proactive way to help people struggling with mental health, and can our community play a larger role?"

The event will begin with a performance of "A Day for Grace," written by Longmont playwright Doug Vincent and roots rock musician Sam Llanas, followed by a panel discussion. The event is moderated by Dr. Barbara Van Dahlen of the Campaign to Change Direction.

The Campaign to Change Direction is a collection of citizens, nonprofits and private-sector individuals with the goal of changing the culture in the United States with regard to mental health, according to its website.

"We hope that this leads to hundreds and hundreds of conversations that need to occur to have the community embrace mental health in ways that we didn't know were possible," Butler said.

Bill Myers, executive director of Mental Health Partners, said his organization provided direct services to 3,236 people in Longmont during the 2015 calendar year.

He added that depression is the most common mental health problem, along with anxiety, but about 15 percent suffer from "serious kinds of mental illness" like schizophrenia, schizo-affective disorder and bipolar disorder.

Myers said mental illness comes with a stigma attached to it that other health problems do not, and that is partially from mental health, historically, seen only in extreme terms — people hallucinating, hearing voices, etc.

"We didn't really talk about the lesser kinds," he said. "That didn't get the same attention."

He said he hopes the coming conversations will lead to a reduction in the stigma attached to mental illness, not only to help those struggling with it, but also to empower other members of the community to reach out to help those in need.

"We can really help care for each other in a more active and conscious way," he said.

Butler said that mental illness is often associated with violence and criminal behavior, and the positive contributions made by people suffering with mental illness are often lost in the fray.

He added that the purpose of the conversations is to let those people know they are valued in the community.

"We want to change the rhetoric," Butler said. "These aren't people with deficiencies, but gifts. We want to create a place where people who are struggling know their voice will be heard."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme