Beekeepers at the Fairmont Hotel Fairmont Hotel

Today’s Wall Street Journal takes readers along for a new social-climbing ritual in Washington—the race to the rooftop.

Hotels, restaurants, law firms and other occupants of the city’s loftier edifices are converting once-ugly roofs into glitzy event venues. Lobbying and law firms, political fundraisers and association chiefs are competing for a-listers by booking the roof deck with the best view of the city’s historic skyline.

But not every rooftop is party-ready. Some have no parapets or railings—a no-no when cocktails flow. Others are still covered in pea gravel and pigeon droppings.

That hasn’t kept two hotels whose roofs aren’t pedestrian-friendly from competing—with each other–by putting beehives, not people, up top.

The Sofitel on Lafayette Park near the White House has three hives on its roof, which this season, its second, produced nearly 500 pounds of honey. The hotel gives its guests silver-topped jars of Le Miel whose provenance, the label claims, is “the flowers of the White House gardens and surrounding parks.”

“We want to believe that our bees are going to the White House and collecting pollen and having fun that way,” Sofitel sales director Alexandra Byrne said in her French accent. “We think they go as far as the Tidal Basin”—home of the capital’s famed cherry trees.

“Oh, so they’re just guessing. Well that’s cute,” says Diana Bulger, spokeswoman for the Fairmont hotel, with a rival apiary on its roof. “We assume that our bees range three miles away, and we are within three miles of the White House, so our bees could be over there too,” says Ms. Bulger. “And our bees go to Rock Creek”—the sweeping park that was a favorite haunt of former president Teddy Roosevelt’s.

The White House, by the way, has its own beehives.

The Fairmont is one of the first hotels in the nation to get into honey production, beginning in 2009, Ms. Bulger says. The hotel uses its own honey in its cuisine, and in the Bee-tini, a cocktail of honey, vodka, tequila and lemon served in its bar. “It’s delicious,” Ms. Bulger says.

The Sofitel uses its honey in its kitchen, too—its signature drink is the Bee Mine, a blend of honey, gin and lemon. “And we will sell our honey in the restaurant starting this fall,” Ms. Byrne says.

“Our honey is delicious. And it’s sustainable—not only because we create our own honey, we help with the pollination of the city, and we are very proud of that.”

The Fairmont runs a beekeeping program for D.C. public schoolchildren, Ms. Bulger says. And it’s establishing another rooftop hive strictly for pollinator bees: there’s a pop-up version of that hive, without stinging insects, in the hotel lobby.

“We’re really excited about that,” she said.

There’s no pollinator pop-up in the Sofitel’s lobby. However, says Ms. Byrne, the Sofitel also keeps bees in Paris.

ON PAGE ONE:

Washington Power Brokers Battle for the Rooftops

Video: Washington Power Brokers Race to the Rooftops