Health Americans Used To Want The Government To Insure Everyone. Here’s Why That Changed. CREDIT: AP Photo/Jon Elswick, File

A majority of Americans don’t believe the government has a responsibility to extend insurance to all citizens, according to the latest polling from Gallup. It’s the third year in a row that most Americans have held that position — and a pattern is starting to emerge:

CREDIT: Gallup

Before President Obama made health care reform his central policy goal, the majority of Americans agreed with the statement that “it is the federal government’s responsibility to ensure that all Americans have healthcare coverage” by relatively wide margins. According to Gallup, this sentiment peaked in 2006, with nearly 70 percent of respondents indicating that the government should provide coverage for all and just 28 percent taking the opposite stance.

But, as soon as the Affordable Care Act attempted to actually get the country closer to that reality, public sentiment shifted. More Republicans and Independents started to say that health coverage should be outside the government’s purview. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Gallup pollsters conclude that the “tangible manifestations of a larger government role in healthcare most likely created a significant backlash.”

It’s not hard to see why so many people have soured on the idea of government-run health care. Over the past several years, political opponents of the ACA have launched a full scale attack against it, blocking state-level funding from going toward education campaigns about the law and leaving millions of Americans utterly confused about what it actually does. During the 2012 elections, the law’s opponents outspent its supporters by a five to one margin. On top of that, blunders during the roll out of Obamacare’s new marketplaces — including disastrous website glitches and President Obama’s misleading promise that “if you like your plan, you can keep it” — took a serious toll on public opinion about how well the law was working.

The backlash to Obamacare has had some big consequences. Although it’s been the law of the land for several years by now, state officials have prevented its total implementation by blocking some of its coverage provisions. For instance, after the Supreme Court ruled the law’s Medicaid expansion to be optional, it gave GOP-controlled states an opportunity to refuse to expand their programs — a move that’s leaving an estimated four million low-income people uninsured. That’s ultimately prevented the health law from lowering the national uninsured rate to the level that it otherwise would have, according to a recent New York Times analysis.

Other states are moving in the opposite direction. Activists in Vermont, Ohio, and New York, for example, have been pushing for universal health care systems that go beyond the Affordable Care Act.

Last year, the president of the World Bank suggested that every government should figure out a way to provide universal health care by 2030, pointing out that policy could dramatically reduce the number of people around the world who are impoverished by medical expenses. The U.S. is currently one of the only developed nations that hasn’t yet put this type of system in place.