So, Charlie Beck, you’ve just been reappointed to a second five-year term. What do you do next?

Well, one thing he didn’t do was to head for Disneyland.

On the day of his reappointment as chief of the Los Angeles Police Department and after all the formalities. Beck went to a memorial ceremony at Rampart Station for Officer Kat Talbot, who was killed in an off-duty car crash.

Beck went out for a celebratory dinner with his family and then when off on a pre-scheduled vacation.

But, the lack of a major post-appointment celebration left many wondering if Beck had missed an opportunity to begin to mend fences with rank-and-file officers — the ones he considered the backbone of his support — and who are angry over issues ranging from pay to discipline.

Beck could have begun appearing at roll calls to let the officers know he was aware of their dissatisfaction and say he is willing to work on issues that are upsetting them.

Police Protective League President Tyler Izen said he has talked with Beck and the chief promised to work with them.

“We are ready to help him work out these issues,” Izen said. “But, I think morale is much lower than he appreciates.”

Beck’s aides said he will meet regularly with officers and community leaders after his vacation.

One last jab at mayor

As it appears the legal dispute over two Department of Water and Power trusts is near, the head of the union representing the workers was able to get in one last jab against Mayor Eric Garcetti.

Brian D’Arcy, business manager of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 18 and who has been fighting city efforts to audit the books of the Joint Training and Joint Safety Institutes, decided to work directly with City Council President Herb Wesson — cutting Garcetti out of the discussions and any credit for resolving the issue.

Garcetti was able to offer a counterpunch, calling a 4 p.m. news conference with Wesson and other officials to claim victory with the proposal.

Garcetti and D’Arcy have been at odds since last year’s mayoral election and Garcetti’s calls for changes in DWP work rules and other reforms.

A new ‘young gun’

In the race to succeed Rep. Henry Waxman in the South Bay, Republican Elan Carr received a boost last week when the National Republican Congressional Committee designated him as a “young gun.”

With the designation, Carr will be able to call on GOP leaders to serve as mentors and build up his financial base of support.

Advertisement

“Our job as a committee is to help elect Republicans to office that will serve as a check and balance on the Obama administration,” NRCC Chairman Greg Walden said.

“Elan has outlined conservative principles that will grow jobs, stop the harmful effects of Obamacare, and get Washington’s spending under control. Elan has met a series of rigorous goals that will put him in a position to win on Election Day.”

Despite coming in first in the primary election, Carr is considered the underdog to state Sen. Ted Lieu, D-Torrance, because of the number of Democrats registered in the district.

Rick Orlov is a Daily News staff writer and columnist. His column, Tipoff, appears on Mondays. For a daily fix on politics go to the Sausage Factory at http://blogs.dailynews.com/politics. You can contact Orlov at rick.orlov@langnews.com or at 213-978-0390.