To Democrats, and some Republicans, Mr. Ryan and the Republican leadership have a quandary of their own making. Republican lawmakers and candidates often averted their gaze when questions were raised about President Obama’s birth certificate and religion. They tolerated breaches of decorum, such as Representative Joe Wilson’s cry of “You lie” during a presidential address, and even made light of the man who brought many of those alleged conspiracies to the fore: Mr. Trump.

“The party repeatedly made myopic decisions, tolerating the intolerable views of a segment of the party unwilling to accept that problem-solving is complicated,” said Tony Fratto, a Republican consultant who served in the George W. Bush administration. “The short game was winning some midterms. The cost was creating an incoherent and unsustainable coalition.”

Democrats are now seizing on this trajectory, and trying to tie all Republican incumbents to the legacy. “Donald Trump is appealing to some of the darkest forces in America,” Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Democratic leader, said on Wednesday. “It’s time for Republicans to stop the Frankenstein they created.”

Video

Many Republicans reject that analysis, especially when it comes to Mr. Ryan. His aides answer questions of Mr. Obama’s birth with a letter that includes a copy of the president’s birth certificate. “I certainly understand the importance of this issue,” the letter says, “and I hope you find the information useful.”

Instead, they pin Mr. Trump’s rise on their own failures to deliver on promises like the repeal of the Affordable Care Act, the defunding of Planned Parenthood, and the broad shrinking of government. That helped spawn the anger propelling Mr. Trump.

“People were not totally upfront in saying as long as President Obama is in the White House, we need to be realistic about our goals,” said Brian Walsh, a former official at the National Republican Senatorial Committee.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While Mr. Ryan politely rejected the birth inquiries, others did not. Asked in 2011 on the NBC program “Meet the Press” about the birth certificate conspiracy, and House members still promoting it, Mr. Boehner responded, “It really is not our job to tell the American people what to believe and what to think.” Asked on the same program about such “crazy talk,” Mr. Cantor replied, “I don’t think it’s, it’s nice to call anyone crazy, O.K.?”

The Tea Party movement initially was focused on government spending, health care and bailout programs, but in 2014, with the deficit falling and the economy improving, the movement turned to immigration — and a fierce opposition to an immigration law overhaul embraced by some Republicans, including Senator Marco Rubio of Florida and Mr. Ryan.

That June, Mr. Ryan and Representative Mario Diaz-Balart, Republican of Florida, were trying to drum up votes for an immigration bill that included a path to legal status for undocumented immigrants. Then Mr. Cantor, the majority leader, lost to a Tea Party primary challenger who accused him of being weak on illegal immigrants. Supporters abandoned the effort, and the immigration overhaul died.

By then, Mr. Obama had produced his so-called long-form birth certificate, publicly mocking Mr. Trump for his fixation. But in the anti-immigration movement, Mr. Trump found his new cause. His racially charged statements that Mexican illegal immigrants were possibly rapists and drug-runners meshed with statements by Representative Steve King of Iowa, that undocumented Mexican immigrants have “calves the size of cantaloupes because they’re hauling 75 pounds of marijuana.” And they elevated the views on immigration Mr. Ryan was trying to defeat.

In the Republican-controlled House now, there are frequent flare-ups over racially charged issues, from a movement among some conservatives to roll back voting rights, to a fight over confederate flags at federal cemeteries that shut down the appropriations process last summer.

On Tuesday, nine House Republicans voted against renaming a post office in Winston-Salem, N.C., after the poet Maya Angelou. Representative Mo Brooks of Alabama, a leader of anti-immigration forces, called her a “communist sympathizer.”

“Everyday we see manifestations of it,” said Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, in an interview. “Refusing to take down the Confederate flag, refusing to pass a Voting Rights Act, the list goes on and on. Republicans reject that. But they have flirted with Mr. Trump and his views for years. In 2012, Mitt Romney stood smiling as Mr. Trump expressed his “honor and privilege” to endorse his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination.

Mr. Romney hailed Mr. Trump’s “extraordinary ability to understand how our economy works.”

Stuart Stevens, a Romney campaign strategist, sees nothing wrong with that. “We don’t shun people and Donald Trump wasn’t shunned,” he said. “When he said crazy things people said they were crazy.” But he has been a Trump critic this year.

For now Republicans dismiss that Mr. Trump can lay much of a glove on Mr. Ryan. “I’m not sure how much weight Trump’s threat carries,” said Senator Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona and a critic of Mr. Trump. “Certainly not more than Ryan can bench.”