Andrew Cuomo. | AP Photo/Mike Groll Insurers and business groups object to health tax math in Cuomo's budget

New York insurers and business groups say a little-noticed provision in Gov. Andrew Cuomo's budget proposal violates state statute.

The objection relates to the amount of revenue the executive budget assumes from the Health Care Reform Act, or HCRA, tax. According to state statute, the amount the state can collect from a portion of this tax, known as the Covered Lives Assessment, is $1.045 billion.

Story Continued Below

Cuomo's budget is counting on $1.09 billion, a $45 million increase.

"We are concerned about any increases to an already burdensome levy on health care, especially when the hikes are hidden and when they result in the collection of money that exceeds what is allowed by state law," reads a letter a group of business trade groups, including the Business Council of New York State, sent to state health commissioner Dr. Howard Zucker.

The amount was there in last year's budget, too, and the tax is passed on to consumers in the form of higher health insurance costs.

"Forty-five million may not seem much in relation to the overall collection of nearly $5.6 billion under HCRA, [but] it nonetheless adds to the bottom line of New Yorkers' health insurance costs," Leslie Moran, spokeswoman for the New York Health Plan Association, said in an email. "We should be working to make health insurance more affordable, not less."

The Cuomo administration did not respond to a request for comment.

Business leaders say the extra $45 million is symptomatic of a larger problem with the Covered Lives Assessment, which keeps increasing.

The assessment began in 1996 and was supposed to be a tax on insurance companies to help pay hospitals for graduate medical education. It was also supposed to be temporary, but lawmakers soon realized they had a cash cow on their hands and the assessments are now used for far more than their original purpose.

The Covered Lives Assessment is broken down by region. New York City, for example, pays more because it receives more for graduate medical education. Utica pays the least.

Insurance companies are supposed to divide the number of lives they insure in a particular region by the total amount the region owes.

The more people the insurance company covers, the lower the per life assessment should be. Except it doesn't appear to be working out that way. As the health insurance rolls have swelled thanks, in part, to a reviving economy and the Affordable Care Act, the Covered Lives Assessment has increased as well.

"Since the number of covered New Yorkers has gone up — by [the state health department's] own reporting, more than 2.7 million New Yorkers have gained access to health insurance through the NY State of Health exchange — the per lives assessment should be going down not up," the letter from the business trades groups states. "That’s just simple math."

The HCRA has long been derided by insurance companies and small businesses, which estimate that its assessments, if they were counted as state taxes, would amount to the third-highest tax the state levies on individuals and the largest tax on businesses.

The state collects $5.6 billion in total revenue from the HCRA and the assessment funds 25 percent of the state's share of Medicaid. It also pays for the indigent care pool, which reimburses hospitals for treating the uninsured, the state's health insurance exchange, and the State Health Information Network, which is linking electronic medical records across the state.

HCRA money was also what former Assembly speaker Sheldon Silver gave to Columbia University physician Dr. Robert Taub for the completion of a center to study mesothelioma, a move later described by U.S. attorneys as an illicit quid pro quo for Taub’s agreement to direct clients with cancer to Silver’s law firm Weitz & Luxenberg.

Read the letter here: http://politi.co/1R5kGAG

Authors: