Governor Chris Christie is "the perfect Republican," Obama imitator Reggie Brown told an audience of Democrats at the Apollo Theater on Monday night, because he has "a type 1 personality and type 2 diabetes."

The occasion was the New York County Democratic Committee's second annual "Demmy Awards" fund-raising ceremony.

Assemblyman Keith Wright played M.C., wearing a white suit, shirt, and tie, and introducing a number of entertainers and officials including, in no particular order of celebrity, comedian Gary Gulman, performers from the Dance Theatre of Harlem, rapper Doug E. Fresh and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver.

Silver, who entered to Frank Sinatra's "New York, New York," said, "What I really wanna say, most importantly, to tonight's winners: I made it happen for you."

Wright presented the "Big Apple Award" to State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli, "whose name is on every state paycheck—you better clap a little louder than that!"

In his speech, DiNapoli said, "Hey, politics should be fun, right? If we don't have a good time while we're fighting hard for causes, then what is it all about?"

During a fifteen-minute performance, Brown took shots at George W. Bush, the Transportation Security Administration and Obamacare. (He steered well clear of city politics and the politicians present.)

"Obamacare will save precious taxpayer dollars," Brown said, as Obama. "In the future, T.S.A. airport scans will double as x-rays to be analyzed by doctors. [There will be] a set of extra lanes, where travelers can request certain procedures, like prostate checks."

The list of attendees (for at least some part of the two-and-a-half hour long event) included Public Advocate Letitia James, State Senator Bill Perkins, Assemblyman Richard Gottfried, Assemblywoman Linda Rosenthal, Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer, Chirlane McCray's chief of staff Rachel Noerdlinger, Councilman Mark Levine, Councilwoman Inez Dickens, Councilman Andy King, and former councilman and current State Senate candidate Robert Jackson.

Among the event's many sponsors were Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, BerlinRosen, SKD Knickerbocker, Time Warner Cable and Verizon Wireless.