This week on The Broke and the Beautiful, Mickey Rooney’s stepson admitted to taking $2.8 million from his stepfather. Also, Ozzy Osbourne’s oldest child is occupying his brain with bankruptcy.

Actor Mickey Rooney arrives at the opening night of the UCLA Film and Television Archive film series “Champion: The Stanley Kramer Centennial” in Los Angeles in August 2013. Mr. Rooney’s stepson, Christopher Aber, has admitted to taking $2.8 million from his bank account. Gus Ruelas/Reuters

Christopher Aber hasn’t always seen eye to eye with stepfather Mickey Rooney, having been accused by the “Babes in Arms” star of squandering his money. Now, Mr. Aber has admitted to taking $2.8 million from Mr. Rooney’s bank accounts. But he and his wife are in bankruptcy, so he can’t afford to pay that money back, the Daily Mail reported. So what’s going to happen? According to TMZ, Mr. Rooney’s lawyers plan to sue to recoup money from the couple’s homeowner insurance policy, even though the insurance company has said it won’t pay anything.

Louis Osbourne is going off the rails on a trip to bankruptcy court. According to Entertainmentwise, the older son of Black Sabbath frontman Ozzy Osbourne has been declared bankrupt. Court papers show the younger Osbourne, who had lived in the U.S. before coming back to live in the U.K., has had financial difficulties. Louis Osbourne, Ozzy’s song with his first wife, lives in Birmingham, England, with his wife Louise.

British soap-opera actor Ryan Thomas is staring into the distance…staring into the distance at the bankruptcy court. According to the Mirror, the Coronation Street actor, who’s thought to earn £90,000 ($145,000) per year, has been declared bankrupt. But he’s determined to make it out of the bankruptcy pit alive, having said that he’s “not letting it get me down,” the Mirror noted. Mr. Thomas isn’t the first British actor to appear on Broke—we’ve also seen bankruptcy cases from the likes of Amanda Abbington and Martine McCutcheon.

They couldn’t get their hands on a famous bloody sock, but some people’s second-wildest dreams came true during an auction for some of Curt Schilling’s stuff. According to the Boston Globe, the ex-Red Sox player had a giant garage sale last weekend, selling everything from kitchenware and stuffed animals to a punching bag and a baby grand piano. Mr. Schilling’s wife, Shonda Schilling, slammed media for saying her family held the sale because they were broke. “We are not doing this because we have lost everything and need the money,” she noted on her Facebook page. “What we have always known and most people can not [sic] grasp through all of this is that what ever [sic] will sell, give away, or donate…possessions don’t make you happy. We still have each other and an amazing community to surround us.” Mr. Schilling, whose failed videogame company, 38 Studios LLC, filed for bankruptcy last year with more than $100 million in debt. The case has since fielded its share of drama.

It’s crazy, it’s sexy and it’s cool. According to USA Today, “CrazySexyCool: The TLC Story” is finally here, premiering this Sunday on VH1. The biopic for the girl group touches on successes and setbacks, including the loss of Lisa “Left-Eye” Lopes from a car accident and Tionne “T-Boz” Watkins’s stint in bankruptcy, USA Today reported. “You have to make sure you have an accountant and that you sign all your own checks,” said Rozonda “Chilli” Thomas. Ms. Watkins filed for bankruptcy in late 2011. The case was scrubbed the following February.

Write to Melanie Cohen at melanie.cohen@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MelanieLisa.