In the first week of January, most people reading this probably aren’t thinking about doing their taxes. If you’re like me, that will pop to mind about April 1. And then maybe you’ll actually get around to doing them with a few days to spare until the April 15 deadline.

So why do we procrastinate? Lots of reasons come to mind for me, one of which is the fact that by April, I have no idea where many of my tax documents are. That means contacting financial institutions and dredging up W-2s at the office. Yuck.

But if you act soon, this year’s endeavour could be somewhat simpler.

Filing before you file

The first step is figuring out a filing system — filing in the organizational sense.

“If they have everything together in one central location as they go through the year, it’s a lot easier at the end of the year,” said Jimmy Pendergrass, partner at Pratas Smith & Moore LLC. “Put that in a file or central location as soon as they see it, so they’re not having to touch it several times. If they put it in that one place, it’ll be there when they’re ready.”

Some people use expanding files, he said, but he’s seen everything from shoe boxes to paper sacks. The important thing, he said, is just keeping it together:

“The better organized they are, the better it is for them and the less time is it for us.”

If there’s a question about whether a document is needed, Pendergrass said, keep it and let your tax adviser make that determination.

Separate into categories

If you plan to itemize your deductions, you’ll need a way to separate all of your receipts by category. And depending on your circumstance, there could be hundreds of receipts to work with.

That’s why, from a tax preparer’s standpoint, it’s easier if a client comes in with receipts and forms separated, said Les McGrew, district manager for H&R Block.

“Different people have different ways of doing it,” McGrew said. “We’ve had people bring all their receipts in in big paper bags. If they’re itemizing deductions, total it up by category. If they’re filing on their own, a lot of people have their own ways of filing. If they’re itemizing, it’s nice if they have it all separated.”

And how many forms should there be?

“It depends on the situation,” McGrew said. “If they have a lot of medical expenses, that could require a whole lot of different forms and receipts. With mortgage expenses, it’s usually just a few.”

The good news is most people nowadays don’t itemize their deductions, so the odds are good you won’t have to keep a year’s worth of receipts organized in order to do your taxes.

“Not a lot of people can itemize anymore,” McGrew said, “It’s happening less and less because of the standard deduction. That’s been going up every year for the last 30 years. You just take the bigger deduction of the two.”

Do you have everything?

If you don’t have your tax documents already, you should receive them soon.

“Probably mid-January, some will start coming in,” Pendergrass said, “but they may be coming in as late as late February, early March.”

McGrew said employers are required to issue W-2s no later than Jan. 31, but many do so earlier.

The IRS starts accepting tax returns on Jan. 20.

Pendergrass said there’s no way of knowing if you have received every document you need, but offered a clue:

“They should know the majority of what they should expect to receive by what they’re invested in,” he said.

How do you tell whether that letter from your bank is a normal account statement or something you need to keep for your taxes?

“Most of the time, employers or anyone else that sends out documents will put on there ‘For tax return purposes,’ ” McGrew said.

But if you’re concerned or simply unsure that you have all the documents you need, you may benefit from some help.

“It depends on how complicated their return is,” McGrew said. “Sometimes they need to get with a tax professional and figure out.”

Keep in mind

One thing that will be new in preparing this year’s taxes is the Affordable Care Act.

“A very big factor will be the Affordable Care Act, and a lot of people are not aware of that,” McGrew said. “So-called ‘Obamacare,’ although we’re not supposed to call it that anymore, basically is reconciled on our tax returns.”

If a person or family purchased marketplace insurance and their actual income was different than they estimated, that’s reconciled by the government, McGrew explained. That means you could either owe a penalty or you could have an additional refund.

When asked for tips for people who want to file their own tax returns, McGrew’s response was simple: “With the Affordable Care Act, I’d advise them not to.

“A lot of people who’ve been doing it by themselves will be going to a tax service this year,” he added. “If they are going to do it themselves, they need to make sure they read very carefully what they’re putting in there. If they’re not sure (what a tax program is asking for), do a little research for what that actually means. I’ve seen a lot come in that we’ve had to amend.”

glenys.young@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8747

Follow Glenys on Twitter @GlenysYoung