Potential 2016 presidential candidate Ben Carson continues to dig a hole for himself. The retired neurosurgeon issued a Facebook apology in early March after he said that people come out of jail gay, and now he has likened President Barack Obama to a psychopath.

In an article by Jason Zengerle in the April issue of GQ titled “What If Sarah Palin Were a Brain Surgeon,” the presidential hopeful rants about Nazis and claims the leader of America is a lunatic while discussing one of Obama’s speeches with Armstrong Williams, Carson’s business manager and unofficial political adviser.

Via GQ:

“He looks good,” Williams said. "He looks clean. Shirt’s white. The tie. He looks elegant.” “Like most psychopaths," Carson grumbled. "That’s why they’re successful. That’s the way they look. They all look great.” Continue Reading Below

But when Williams seemingly defends the leader of the free world, Carson does not relent:

“He faces the same challenges you will face," Williams said of Obama as he spoke. “He’s gotta convince people to believe him. That’s all he’s doing: selling his narrative.” “But he knows he’s telling a lie!" Carson vented. “He’s trying to sell what he thinks is not true! He’s sitting there saying, ‘These Americans are so stupid I can tell them anything.’ "

Carson compared the U.S. to Nazi Germany while he was at Jerusalem’s Holocaust museum last year, the GQ article explains. Though Zengerle tries to convince Carson he was “out of line” when he said Americans under Obama are as afraid to criticize their government as Germans were under the Third Reich, the retired neurosurgeon stands by the analogy.

Carson has not issued a statement since his recent statements went viral. Instead, his latest Facebook post was about the anniversary of Obamacare -- something he has said is worse than slavery. " 'Happy’ Anniversary, Obamacare. Despite the White House spin, Obamacare is clearly not a success,” he wrote in an edited post Monday.

Follow me on Twitter @mariamzzarella