Image Gallery: It's Your Business: Home 2 Suites Hotel » more Photo by: Robin Scholz Exterior at the Home 2 Suites hotel on Neil Street in Champaign on Wednesday, Feb. 3, 2016.

Visitors to Champaign-Urbana have a new option for overnight stays — one with many of the comforts of home.

Home2 Suites by Hilton Champaign/Urbana opened Tuesday at 2013 S. Neil St. in Champaign's Carriage Center complex.

General manager Molly Mooney said the new hotel is the 78th Home2 Suites and the first of that brand in Illinois.

"It is Hilton's newest brand, and we're pretty excited to be the first one in Illinois," Mooney said. "The location is fantastic. We are really excited that we are so close to the Research Park and the University of Illinois."

Mooney reports that Home2 is already sold out for the Christie Clinic Illinois Marathon weekend this spring and several football weekends this fall.

The hotel has 104 rooms (including 19 handicapped-accessible rooms), all of them suites. Every room has a refrigerator, microwave, dishwasher, full-sized sleeper sofa, 42-inch flat-screen TV and even a recycling bin.

All the countertops are made out of recyclable materials, and the toilets are made to use less water than traditional ones.

"We're geared more toward extended stay, but we're also great for families who are traveling," Mooney said. "We made sure we included lots of power outlets in each room for plugging in things like your iPod or cellphone."

Mooney, who has worked for Hilton for seven years at the Homewood Suites and the Hilton Garden Inn, said the new Home2 Suites has 23 employees.

The staff calls the lobby The Oasis, and it includes an area where guests get complimentary breakfast, which includes waffles, yogurt, cereal, two types of egg entrees, sandwiches, burritos, doughnuts, bagels and English muffins.

If guests want to cook out, there's a nearby outdoor area featuring a pair of gas grills.

The facility features a meeting room with a 70-inch plasma TV and a full audiovisual package.

When it is time for recreation, Home2 Suites has that covered, too.

The indoor heated saline pool doesn't require chlorine, so guests don't have to worry about being exposed to harsh chemicals, Mooney said.

The 24-hour fitness facility includes treadmills, free weights, an elliptical machine, a bike machine and medicine balls. And a 24-hour laundry room is nearby.

New name for credit union

The University of Illinois Employees Credit Union has a new name.

The credit union changed its name to the UI Community Credit Union on Monday.

"With the name change, we are eliminating the barrier that the word employees created," said E.J. Donaghey, president and chief executive office. "We have always been proud to serve both campus and community, and now our name will truly show it."

The facility will continue to be governed by its local volunteer board of directors. It is a not-for-profit, member-owned cooperative that provides a wide range of financial products and services.

New Convenient Care

Christie Clinic opened a new Convenient Care facility in Tuscola on Monday.

The clinic at 300 N. Main St. treats nonemergency conditions, including allergies and infections, abrasions and bruises, colds and flu.

A person does not have to make an appointment or be a Christie Clinic patient to use Convenient Care.

The clinic is open from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Friday and 8 a.m. to noon on Saturday; it is closed on Sunday.

Other Convenient Care locations are in Champaign, Urbana, Danville, Mahomet and St. Joseph.

Acquisition announced

CIBC of Illinois Inc., an employee benefits specialist and Affordable Care Act-certified firm with locations in Champaign, Kankakee, Indianapolis, western Michigan, Texas and Alabama, has acquired Comprehensive Planning Inc.'s group benefit division.

Comprehensive Planning Inc. is located in the Naperville area and will further expand the CIBC footprint to the north.

"I am excited about the opportunity that CIBC provides for me and the additional services that will be available to my clients," Comprehensive Planning CEO Dave Lucado said.

Restore turns 1

The Habitat for Humanity Top Drawer Restore at 125 E. University Ave., C, is celebrating its first anniversary.

The Top Drawer Restore sells unique collectibles, framed art, vintage jewelry and rare and best-selling books and records.

To celebrate the one-year anniversary, all records at Top Drawer will be sold buy-one-get-one-free in February.

In addition, Habitat development director Kelly Hill said Top Drawer has expanded its merchandising through eBay sales.

Ag economy event set

The Dewey Bank, 2994 County Road 900 E, Dewey, is planning a breakfast for area farmers interested in learning about the local farming economy.

Speakers will include Darrel Good, professor emeritus in the Department of Agricultural and Consumer Economics at the University of Illinois; farm business analyst Brad Zwilling; and certified public accountant Heidi Punke Brown.

The breakfast is set for 8:30 a.m. Feb. 17 at the Dewey Community Church on Third Street. Reservations are due by Friday at 897-1125.

Contact Tim Mitchell at 217-351-5366 or by email at tmitchel@news-gazette.com.