Photo by Ben Allen/witf Julie Assi balances a caseload of about 30 patients at Wellspan as a health coach.

(York) -- Coaches lead men to glory against the Soviets in the 1980 Winter Olympics - that's Herb Brooks, or patrol the football sidelines in the midst of racial turmoil in the Civil Rights Era - Herman Boone, among others, or inspire a ragtag group of kids on the ice - Gordon Bombay (see the Mighty Ducks).

Coaching may have first sprouted up in sports, but it’s now creeping into all aspects of our daily routines -- life coaches, work coaches, and motivational coaches. So, health care isn’t immune to the trend.

Physicians, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners all have seen their roles shift in the past few years. But those jobs have been around for decades. Health coaches only really came into existence in the past five years.

Julie Assi, a health coach at Wellspan, follows a patient from the time they walk into the emergency room to their admission into the hospital to their discharge.

“I can do it on my time, it’s not a rush rush rush type of a job. There’s a lot of things that health coaches do. They really do see their effort being successful. You can actually track what happens to these people when you relationships with them for months and years," she says.

Assi seems like the kind of health coach you would want on your team. She’s engaging, talks about how she’s always learning new techniques, and never stops trying to come up with a solution to whatever is in front of her.

“If somebody needs a walker, the doctor will say they don’t have insurance, how can you get a walker? Because usually you send a prescription, they go to the pharmacy, they pick it up, and they have their walker. So there are lots of different entities in the community that can help. It’s kinda like a social worker role, and a nursing role, and a counseling role, kinda wrapped up into one."

Photo by AP Photo USA coach Herb Brooks may not be a health coach, but he was a coach. Here he's looking on during the closing minutes of the semifinal game against the USSR at the 1980 Winter Olympic Games.

Assi has one thing on her checklist every morning and afternoon: run a report on the 30 or so patients she tracks to see if they had any medical visits. Beyond that, it’s a little bit of everything. She’ll check in on diabetics who aren’t under control to work with them, do research herself to get more information on patients and their conditions, and even call some at home just to see how they’re doing.

“If I happen to pull them aside when they’re leaving, when they’re finished seeing the doctor, and ask them a couple of questions, if I can engage in a conversation, might help them be more open and receptive to having other people help educate them as well and to help expand their team.”

Wellspan Health first started its health coach program in 2009, and was willing to foot the cost for a few years. But as Karen Jones, Wellspan’s chief medical officer says, the landmark health care legislation, the Affordable Care Act, changed that attitude and removed many questions about whether the program’s financially sustainable.

“There’s a code that can be submitted for payment after a patient’s discharged from the hospital, that we in the practice stay in touch with them over a period of 30 days. Well, we were doing that before the code came out.”

Wellspan, like most health systems, wants to innovate and find efficiencies, but Jones says it also needs to get paid for the work its doing.

Health coaches not only have to work with patients, but are part of a team. That means coordinating with physicians, PAs, radiologists, counselors, dieticians, and whoever else might be taking care of a patient.

"It does take a village to take care of one person. It takes all of us working together. And as long as we can work together, across the lines of what we are and who we are, it works great," says Assi.

Sure doesn’t sound much different than a sports coach after all.