Syracuse, N.Y. -- Retirees can expect the cost of Medicare health insurance to eat up a bigger and bigger share of their Social Security checks in the future, according to a federal report issued earlier this week.

The report, by the trustees who oversee Medicare and Social Security, shows the financial health of Medicare, the government health insurance program for people 65 and older, has improved.

But a section of the report that received little attention shows 23 percent of the average Social Security recipient's check is needed to pay for premiums for Medicare Part B, which covers doctor and other outpatient services, and Part D, which covers prescription drugs, and co-payments. The report predicts that portion will grow to 44 percent by 2088.

In 1967, by comparison, about 6 percent of the average Social Security check was needed to pay for Medicare premiums. Since then Medicare has expanded by adding benefits like prescription drug coverage which accounts for some of the increased cost to retirees.

"This is an untold story," said Rosemary Gibson, a national expert on patient safety and health care, and a senior advisor at the Hastings Centers, a bioethics research institute in Garrison, N.Y. "While many people on Medicare have other sources of income, older Americans will see Medicare consume a growing share of their Social Security check."

Medicare is financed by a portion of the payroll taxes paid by workers and their employers. Medicare also is financed by monthly premiums deducted from Social Security checks.

Social Security is the major source of income for most of the elderly. The average monthly Social Security check received by retirees is $1,294. Among elderly Social Security beneficiaries, more than half of married couples and three-quarters of unmarried people get 50 percent or more of their income from Social Security, according to the Social Security Administration.

Gibson said the elderly are paying more because Medicare spending is out of control. In her book, "Medicare Meltown," she pins much of the blame on drug companies, hospitals, medical device makers, doctors, Wall Street investment banks and other businesses that rely on the more than $600 billion that Medicare spends annually.

"There is a provider sense of entitlement to Medicare's money," she said.

The trustees' report says the fund covering the Medicare program's hospital costs will remain solvent until 2030, four years later than expected a year ago. The report warned that the portion of Social Security that pays benefits to people with disabilities could run short of money by 2016.

The report shows the rate of growth in Medicare spending has slowed down in the last few years. Some experts attribute that to the recent economic downturn. Others credit the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, which provides financial incentives to hospitals that avoid costly patient readmissions.

The report warned the growing wave of aging baby boomers combined with rising health care costs could wipe out the Medicare trust fund in 2030, forcing the Medicare program to cut benefits.

You can contact health writer James T. Mulder at jmulder@syracuse.com or (315) 470-2245. Follow him on Twitter @JamesTMulder