Buy Photo House Speaker Greg Stumbo, center, speaks at a committee hearing Thursday on his bill to force Anheuser-Busch to sell distributorships it owns in Louisville and Owensboro (Photo: By Gregory A. Hall, The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Many of the legislators voting to approve a bill Thursday that would force Anheuser-Busch to sell two Kentucky beer distributorships it owns begged for a compromise in the high-profile battle that pits the world's largest brewer against craft beer makers and some other distributorships.

But no compromise appeared likely after the 15-4 vote by the House Economic Development Committee to send Speaker Greg Stumbo's House Bill 168 to the full House.

The bill would force Anheuser to sell distributorships it owns in Louisville and Owensboro, the Prestonsburg Democrat says, in the name of erasing a loophole in the state's three-tier alcohol system that seeks to separate producers, distributors and retailers.

Stumbo said after the vote that the only possible compromise he sees would be something where Anheuser-Busch could keep the two existing distributorships, but not buy any more, an idea that an Anheuser-Busch official rejected after the meeting.

"We will not support House Bill 168 in its current form or its (potentially) amended form," said Damon Williams, Anheuser-Busch of Louisville's marketing director. "We think we should be offered the same rights that are available to any successful business. ... It's not the option to buy more. It's the option to have the flexibility that's available to any business to grow, to have choices. And I think any cap or any liquidation is just wrong."

Stumbo admitted the future of his bill is uncertain, as several members who voted for it in committee said they may not vote for it when the full House votes. They said their vote was to ensure more debate — and hopefully compromise.

Rep. Dennis Keene, the Wilder Democrat who chairs the Licensing & Occupations Committee that hears most alcohol bills, cast a "pass" vote instead of casting a "yes" or a "no."

"I've got friends on both sides of this issue," he said. "And I'm obviously going to lose some friends over this," encouraging a compromise.

Stumbo said after the vote that the two sides aren't any closer to a compromise.

"They haven't played well in the sandbox together," Stumbo said. "As far as I know, they're still kicking sand at each other."

Stumbo said the grandfathering of Anheuser-Busch's existing distributorships is the only possibility for compromise of which he is aware, but even that would have risks.

One of the reasons to force Anheuser-Busch to sell the existing distributorships is because it would be easier to defend in court under laws that government must give people or businesses in similar situations the same chance, he said. The forced divestiture would better avoid claims that one brewer was getting preferential treatment by getting to keep two existing distributorships, he said.

The hour-long hearing gave supporters, opponents and even one business caught in the middle a chance to make final pitches to legislators on the Kentucky beer war, which has raged for several months and now is one of the most controversial in this year's General Assembly. Stumbo's bill is one of the most heavily lobbied this session with social media campaigns from both sides claiming to be best for preserving and growing jobs.

Stumbo's bill — supported by state alcohol regulators — follows a court battle won by Anheuser-Busch late last year that allowed the company to buy an Owensboro distributorship, like the one it has owned in Louisville since 1978. The court decision said that the concerns about the potential for monopolistic practices by Anheuser-Busch may be worthy of debate, but nothing in Kentucky law prevented malt beverage makers from being distributors.

Stumbo's supporters, represented by the Kentuckians for Entrepreneurs & Growth group that includes craft brewers, distributors and retailers, argue that allowing brewers to act as distributors and solely distribute their products risks the jobs that independent distributors provide the state. They also say letting Anheuser-Busch have distributorships makes it tougher for craft brewers by reducing competition among distributors — since Anheuser-Busch distributes its products — and keeps some brands from having their beers sold in Kentucky.

Daniel Harrison, a co-founder of Country Boy Brewing in Lexington, said his company's growth is due in part because of independent distributors.

"The only thing that we at Country Boy as brewers are asking for is a level playing field," he said. "... if we cannot allow Kentucky brewers and beer makers to distribute (then) make it equal."

Harrison said others, "particularly the largest brewery in America" shouldn't "have rights that we do not allow our own Kentucky brewers to have."

Anheuser-Busch, the American arm of Belgium-based Anheuser-Busch InBev, responds that employment at the Louisville distributorship grew from 20 to about 175 under its ownership and that craft brews are abundant in the area. Greater Louisville Inc., which is the Louisville Chamber of Commerce, supports Anheuser-Busch.

In the middle is brewer Bob Bonder, who is an owner of Rhinegeist Brewery in Cincinnati and started Riverghost Distributing company in Erlanger, Ky., with the purpose of giving craft brews — including his own — greater access to Kentucky markets. The bill would force him to sell off the distributorship and lose the firm's investment of almost $250,000. Bonder wants something that blocks Anheuser-Busch distributorships but not businesses like his.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Dldv13