STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. – It didn't take long for the mass shooting at Umpqua Community College in Roseburg, Ore., to become culture-war fodder for the never-ending debate over gun violence in America.

Getting not quite as much attention, at least from the White House podium, are reports that the Oregon gunman, Chris Harper Mercer, targeted Christians in the deadly rampage that killed 10 and wounded seven.

One student who survived the carnage said that Harper asked each student what religion they were. If they were Christian, they were told they would see God in "one second" and were murdered.

Another account said if a student replied that they were Christian, they were shot in the head. If they said something else or nothing at all, they were shot in the legs.

Mercer apparently had problems with organized religion.

So, in addition to it being a gun crime, we have a hate crime here. A religious hate crime. What Harper did was no different than what ISIS is doing: Killing people because of their religious beliefs.

Hate crimes are not just about race. Or about gender.

We've seen the reaction when people are targeted because of their race. Who can forget the national outrage that followed the carnage wrought by madman Dylann Roof at a black church in South Carolina?

And we've heard the outcry when women are targeted, as happened during the deadly shooting rampage in Santa Barbara in 2014.

When are we going to hear the outrage that Christians were targeted by a gunman in Oregon?

We haven't heard it from President Barack Obama, who bemoaned that fact that America is growing numb to mass shootings. Something's gotta change. Americans have to vote for people who are going to do something about this issue.

He should start by looking at the members of his own party. And in the mirror.

The Democrats had control of the White House and both legislative houses during the 111th Congress, at the beginning of Obama's administration. And they did what on guns?

Nothing. Gun-reform Democratic lawmakers could barely get hearings on their issues.

The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, which had endorsed Obama in 2008, gave the president an "F" rating on guns during his first year in office.

Meanwhile, all the president's attentions were focused on passing a stimulus package and Obamacare. And cap-and-trade legislation on carbon emissions, which went nowhere.

Those were the priorities. And nobody's arguing with them. Obama and the Democrats won, they were in control, they had the opportunity to set the agenda. To the victors go the spoils. Hope and change, remember?

Rightly or wrongly, they chose to focus their energies on issues other than gun control. There wasn't even a serious effort to resurrect the assault weapons ban, which had lapsed.

And the inaction didn't end there.

In 2013, the Democratic-controlled Senate rejected bi-partisan legislation that would have expanded background checks. A bid to update the 1994 assault weapons ban also failed, thanks to a plethora of Democratic votes.

So when the president stands there after a mass shooting and shakes his head, bites his lip and wonders why, why nobody's doing anything about guns, he should remember it's not just Republicans and the NRA that have stood in the way. It's not just the bitter clingers. It's been his own party as well.

Also speaking out after the Oregon massacre, Vice President Joe Biden said that we need "sane gun legislation."

Let's see the bill.

Oh, wait. The Republicans control Congress. We'll never get anything done.

How convenient.