Pima Animal Care Center has received 400 animals last week, which adds to nearly 1,000 animals they have already in the center.



Adoptions have been slow this summer and officials said there is simply not enough space for the new animals coming into the center.



"There was a point where we were carrying for 1,000 animals at our shelter," said Pima Animal Care Center Development Director Karen Hollish. "Our shelter was built to hold around 400 pets so even right now with 900, we feel extremely crowded. We do not want to get up to 1,000 again, that was really uncomfortable and really stressful on the animals."



In the last two month, the Pima Animal Care Center has responded to several hoarding situations.

The hoarding complaints tend to go up in the summer because people complain about smell of their animals and want someone to come pick them up.



Fifty animals picked up were picked up from one home, Hollish said.



There are almost 1,000 animals in the shelter total and due to the shortage of space, officials have had to put three animals in a single kennel.

Putting the animals in the same kennel can cause anxiety and can increase their chances of getting sick.



This weekend, PACC is waiving adoption fees for all animals. All animals come with all their shots, sprayed and neutered.

The waived fees will apply to all adoptions at the main shelter at 4000 N. Silverbell Road and at the following off-site adoption locations:

• PetSmart at Oracle and Wetmore (cats, dogs, puppies and kittens)

• PetSmart at Grant and Swan (cats, dogs, puppies and kittens)

• PetSmart at El Con Mall – between Home Depot and Target (cats, dogs, puppies and kittens)

• La Encantada at Skyline Drive/Campbell Road (dogs and puppies)

The shelter is open from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday.

PetSmart locations will offer free kitten and cat adoptions through Sunday, with puppies and dogs from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday.

For more information go to www.pima.gov/animalcare.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.