Tax breaks to lift area medical device businesses Means of funding Affordable Care Act was "horrible"

Latham

Congress passed legislation on Friday that gave a big boost to Capital Region medical device companies by temporarily freezing a tax that helps fund the Affordable Care Act. The legislation was part of $622 billion in tax breaks, passed alongside a $1.1 trillion spending bill. President Barack Obama is expected to sign the legislation into law.

The 2.3 percent tax on the sale of medical devices, enacted on Jan. 1, 2013, would have provided $29 billion in net revenues for the Affordable Care Act from the device industry over a decade. Manufacturers and importers of medical devices have had to report and pay the tax. The freeze runs from Jan. 1, 2016, through Dec. 31, 2017.

Trade groups characterize the tax as harmful to research, development and continued medical progress. Supporters of the tax, however, say its revenue is crucial to funding the Affordable Care Act, and that greater access to health care and enrollment in insurance plans would fuel the medical device industry, counteracting the tax setback.

Upstate New York's concentrated medical device market makes the legislation particularly important to area businesses and the state's economy as a whole, said MedTech president Jessica Crawford.

MedTech, a New York trade association, will next advocate for a full repeal of the tax beyond the two-year freeze, Crawford said.

Lobbying from the medical device and supply industry was more than $32 million in 2014, the highest amount since at least 1998, according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics.

Crawford said the expected benefits from the freeze will help make the case for a full repeal.

"This was a significant tax," Crawford said. "A lot of dollars were being redirected from internal investments — R&D, capital — to paying this tax."

To Nathan Tinker, executive director of the New York Biotechnology Association, the tax freeze will encourage investors to contribute to early- and middle-stage research and developments.

Ultimately, he said, the tax freeze paves an "easier path" to get products to patients. "Getting this tax repealed has been something we've been working on for three years now," he said.

Tinker said the tax is felt "all along the line of production," and into research and academia as well.

In earnings releases, public companies indicate that the tax freeze has cost millions of dollars in operating expenses annually.

In the 12 months ending in May, the tax cost Latham's AngioDynamics $4.14 million. Since 2013, the company has spent $11.6 million, a spokeswoman said.

President and CEO Joseph DeVivo called the tax "horrible" in a 2014 interview with Hearst Newspapers. He said in that interview that the company had to cut $2 million in jobs and $2 million in research and development to pay for the tax.

"Every year that goes by, that's less investment and less people, period," he said at the time. DeVivo couldn't be reached for comment Thursday or Friday.

General Electric's health care unit, which operates a digital mammography production facility in North Greenbush, spent between $60 million and $80 million annually on the tax, GE Healthcare spokeswoman Victoria Ifan said. Freezing the tax, she said, allows the company to think more strategically about growth for the business and invest more in partnerships with suppliers.

Crawford said the tax freeze will help suppliers as well, even though they do not have to pay the tax directly. If medical device companies are no longer responsible for the tax on sales, they can plan to produce more devices, she said, and therefore buy more materials from suppliers.

Precision Extrusion in Glens Falls may see slight changes with the two-year freeze, but the company manufactures custom plastic tubing for a high-end sector of the market, which is not as price sensitive, President Mike Badera said.

But customers who had delayed projects because of the tax burden may now move forward with them, he added.

lellis@timesunion.com • 518-454-5018 • @lindsayaellis