ADVERTISEMENT

Middle class Americans are purchasing health insurance plans from private insurers instead of subsidized government plans, because many of them are earning too much money to qualify.

Americans in this category are earning wages that are above the 400% federal poverty level of $47,080 for an individual, disqualifying them from government subsidies. Other consumers are buying health insurance through the private marketplace instead of government ones like www.healthcare.gov because of their more expansive choices and more easily navigable websites.

“The gap between reality and expectations is especially notable when you look at middle class Americans who earn too much to qualify for them,” said Nate Purpura, vice president of consumer affairs at eHealth, an online health insurance exchange based in Mountain View, Calif.

One benefit is that more consumers are purchasing health insurance, which lowers their cost in the case of an emergency or illness since medical bills can run into the thousands quickly. Others are buying coverage instead of paying the tax penalty, which has risen in 2016 to $695 or 2.5% of their income, but is capped at a maximum of $2,085, which is what an individual would pay for a bronze plan on average.

Although premiums have risen, the Congressional Budget Office said that since the passage of the Affordable Care Act, the number of uninsured people will be lowered by 22 million in 2016. When open enrollment ended in January, only 12 million people signed up for plans through the federal or state-run exchanges , because many people opted to buy them directly from insurance companies or use their employer’s plan, the CBO said.

Americans earning middle class wages are feeling the pinch since many of them make too much money to qualify even for a partial subsidy as deductibles and out of pocket costs have risen.

“A lot of Americans aren’t eligible for subsidies and more than expected are steering away from government exchanges, because they can find better options elsewhere,” he said. “An individual earning $47,000 qualifies for subsidies, but someone earning $48,000 does not. This is solidly middle class.”

While the government exchanges were intended to provide health insurance options to everyone, but they are “really designed only to serve subsidy recipients,” Purpura said.

One issue that arises is the private insurers offer more options and customer service to help consumers determine if they need a lower deductible plan with higher premiums but better prescription drug coverage or, by contrast, a higher deductible plan with lower premiums for people who are healthy and rarely see their doctors.

“Consumers are learning that if you don’t get subsidies, you are better off shopping elsewhere,” Purpura said. “The trend here has troubling implications - we could end up with a two-tiered system where poorer folks who get subsidies shop at government exchanges and middle class folks earning too much for subsidies get more options to choose from and better customer service.”