New name, new brand can help Cedar Creek grow.

Buy Photo The convention center at Cedar Creek Mall has a new name, and the mall is getting a new brand. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)Buy Photo

Welcome to the Central Wisconsin Convention & Expo Center.

That's the latest iteration of the massive exhibition hall formerly known as the Patriot Center, on the Cedar Creek Mall's north end. The new name, new management and new plans to grow its convention business were announced this week at a press conference at which mall owner Ned Brickman also announced plans to invest $6 million in improvements to the facility.

Cedar Creek remains an important anchor for the south metro area's economy, and we are excited to see the new plans taking shape.

Cedar Creek Mall opened as an outlet mall in 1993. Key retailers have come and gone, from early residents such as the Fieldcrest-Cannon linens store and Oshkosh B'Gosh outlet to the more recent and short-lived Steve & Barry's that opened there in 2007 only to close in 2008 as the entire national chain went bankrupt and eventually failed.

The Pick 'N Save and the Cedar Creek Cinema movie theater have had good traffic, but it has not always been clear that many grocery shoppers or moviegoers were bothering to wander the rest of the mall.

The Patriot Center was a solution to the immediate problem of empty space left by Steve & Barry's, but it also represented a smart business decision and a worthwhile direction. With nearby hotels and a location squarely in the state's center, it's a prime location for sports exhibitions, trade shows, political conventions and the like. And the Patriot Center was succeeding in getting steady, well-attended events, though obviously not enough to keep owner Tom Timblin from defaulting on more than $15 million in loans.

Now the mall has a new owner, Brickman, and the convention center is under new management by Dale Elliott of Dale's Weston Lanes. And the 75,00-square-foot expo center continues to have a strong pitch for a range of business that will bring people to the area.

Buy Photo New Cedar Creek Mall owner Ned Brickman speaks during a news conference Tuesday at the mall in Rothschild. He said he wants to bring "energy and life" to mall. (Photo: T'xer Zhon Kha/Daily Herald Media)

A successful convention center is key to the region's economy, but it doesn't necessarily solve the problems of the rest of the mall. Brickman announced an aesthetic revamp of the place, with fresh colors and facades and a new parking lot — finally a welcome change from the dated and never very attractive aqua-and-orange paint scheme.

Recruiting new retailers to any mall is a tough job right now, but Cedar Creek has a lot to recommend it, and it's a good time for a fresh start. We'll look forward to seeing it grow.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1pmRBp3