POWAY (CNS) - A party outside a Poway home left two teens hospitalized with alcohol poisoning, another arrested and the father of its host behind bars for allegedly violating the social host ordinance, a sheriff's sergeant said Saturday.

Sheriff's deputies were dispatched to the residence in the 13600 block of White Rock Station Road near Butterfield Trail shortly after 9:30 p.m. Friday, when a neighbor reported the attendees' vehicles were blocking the road, sheriff's Sgt. Kimberly Baker said.

As the deputies were walking toward the residence to ask that the vehicles be moved, they saw a drunken teenage boy outside the party, and about 100 partygoers inside, Baker said.

Most of the revelers ran off after they were spotted, some jumping over a wall and fleeing through neighboring yards, and the deputies found the ice chests, empty beer cans and vodka bottles they left scattered behind, Baker said.

Poway Fire Department personnel took a girl and a boy to a hospital to be treated for alcohol poisoning, Baker said. Other drunken teens, mostly Poway High School students, were released to their parents, she said.

Deputies stopped a vehicle with five teens inside for running a red light while leaving the party, and determined that four of the occupants had been drinking, including the 16-year-old driver, who only had a provisional license, Baker said.

The driver was arrested, then released to his mother, Baker said.

Deputies also arrested the 16-year-old host's father, Anton Joseph Muawad, 54, who had been inside the home with the boy's mother while the party was underway on the patio and in the pool house area, according to Baker. He was later booked into jail for suspicion of violating the social host ordinance, a misdemeanor, Baker said.

A social host is someone who knowingly hosts an underage drinking party on property he or she owns, leases or otherwise controls, according to the San Diego County Sheriff's Department. The ordinance assigns legal responsibility for underage drinking to those who knew or should have known that it was occurring on their property.