The federal website HealthCare.gov is an online marketplace where people can purchase health insurance. A new study sheds light on how customers who have used such exchanges feel about them and their health plans. Don Ryan, File/AP

Many Americans who bought health insurance through exchanges operated by states or the federal government have a good understanding of how their plan works, but also are afraid they can't afford medical services, according to research published Monday by the Deloitte Center for Health Solutions.

Health insurance exchanges, or "marketplaces," were created as part of President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act. They are used to help Americans shop for health insurance when they do not qualify for a government health program and do not have insurance through an employer.



Low- and middle-income consumers who use the marketplaces often are able to qualify for tax subsidies to offset the cost of monthly premiums and help them afford care. But while the Department of Health and Human Services has touted low premiums averaging $100 a month for the majority of Americans who use exchanges, that message only tells part of the story, leaving out details about copays, deductibles and provider costs that may be out of reach.

"There is a lot of evidence to suggest consumers are learning as they go, and I'm sure it's not without a lot of painful experiences," says Paul Lambdin, insurance exchanges and retail practice leader for health plans at Deloitte Consulting. The Deloitte Center for Health Solutions, a research arm of Deloitte, has been polling consumer attitudes about health insurance and the health care system since 2008.

For this report, researchers surveyed 3,887 people, 406 of whom used online marketplaces to buy health insurance. The analysis did not distinguish between people who used state exchanges and those who used the federal website, HealthCare.gov.

Despite having insurance coverage that some may not have had before, the survey revealed costs are still a major concern for exchange customers. Results showed only 24 percent felt they could get affordable care when they needed it, and just 16 percent felt financially prepared to handle future health care costs. And 1 in 3 reported they had difficulty paying for out-of-pocket expenses when enrolled in a marketplace plan for a full year.



Most important reason insured consumers are dissatisfied with their current health plan

Courtesy Deloitte Center for Health Solutions

According to the study's results, a little over half of marketplace shoppers understood health insurance well, compared with a bit under half of those covered through their employer or through Medicaid or Medicare, which are government programs that cover low-income Americans or people 65 and older.

However, less than a third of exchange enrollees reported being happy with their current plans, with paying too much cited as the top reason for the dissatisfaction. Medicare, in comparison, had a 58 percent satisfaction rate, and 42 percent of people with employer plans were satisfied.

Despite the difficulties, more than a third (35 percent) of consumers said they trusted the exchanges to provide unbiased information – which ranked about the same as the confidence they placed in family and friends and health care providers.

Lambdin, however, says the exchanges still need to improve.

"It still really is cumbersome to try to figure out exactly when you buy that product what network it's attached to and what physician you can access … and trying to understand special rules," he says. "There needs to be more transparency. All parties are working in that direction, but that's nascent compared to where it needs to be."



Trust in sources to provide reliable information and advice about health plans

Courtesy Deloitte Center for Health Solutions

The study also showed that consumers, particularly if they are young, are willing to accept more limited provider networks – called "narrow networks" – to limit prices. This means that the number of providers they can see are limited to certain doctors or hospitals. So, for example, a patient could risk going into surgery and then emerging to find out a member of the medical team – like an anesthesiologist – does not fall under his or her network, causing the patient to end up paying more for a procedure than planned.

"That's a messy part of it that I don't unfortunately see going away, but it's not different from commercial insurance today," Lambdin says. "The hope is that after a few more years, there will be a little more stability in the market."



Willingness to accept network-price tradeoffs among health exchange enrollees by age

Courtesy Deloitte Center for Health Solutions

From the first year of open enrollment to the second, about half of people who used the marketplaces switched plans, and about 40 percent of those who did cited cost as their biggest concern.

But such a move can come with a trade-off, Lambdin warns.

"When they are looking at that price and deciding about a new plan, hopefully they are aware if they are going to lose access to some caregivers they have relied on and think carefully about that before they pull the trigger," he says.





Updated on Aug. 6, 2015: This story has been updated with the number of people surveyed who also used the marketplaces to purchase health insurance.