The high-risk, U.S. led raid to rescue hostages held by terrorist forces in Yemen failed largely because U.S. commandos lost the element of surprise, an analyst said Sunday.

Matthew Olsen, former director of the National Counterterrorism Center, said the operation was “dangerous and risky,” adding that al Qaeda operatives were on the lookout after an earlier failed rescue attempt.

“You had al Qaeda operatives who were armed, and they were on alert, given the prior rescue attempt,” Mr. Olsen said on ABC’s “This Week with George Stephanopoulos.” “This is a very remote and rugged area of Yemen, and it looks like U.S. forces lost the element of surprise.”

SEE ALSO: U.S. commandos join Yemen in hostage rescue, kill al Qaeda fighters

Yemeni security officials on Sunday said 10 al Qaeda militants were killed in the raid to rescue American photojournalist Luke Somers and South African teacher Pierre Korkie. They both died of wounds sustained during the raid.

The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to brief reporters.

The 40 commandos from the elite Seal Team 6 were discovered after an al Qaeda guard left the compound to relieve himself, according to ABC News.

Even so, Rep. Mike Rogers, the Michigan Republican who heads the House Intelligence Committee, said he agreed with the Obama administration for attempting the rescue effort.

“I do think it was the right decision to actually engage and try to go in for the rescue attempt,” Mr. Rogers said on CNN’s “State of the Union.” “Nobody can do it better than our special forces community. It doesn’t always go perfectly. That’s always the risk.”

He added, “The information was obviously good, the intelligence was good. Unfortunately, in something like this, they do try to prevent that, they being the terrorists who are holding these hostages. They’re trying to set up a perimeter to stop it, and unfortunately that’s what they ran into.”

About 40 American special operations forces were involved in the rescue attempt, which followed U.S. drone strikes in the area, U.S. officials said.

Following a firefight with militants, the rescuers eventually reached the men and found them alive but gravely wounded. They both died shortly after.

On Thursday, al Qaeda released a video showing Mr. Somers and threatening to kill him in three days if the U.S. did not meet the group’s unspecified demands.

In South Africa, Mr. Korkie’s body is expected to arrive from Yemen on Monday, according to a government statement issued Sunday.

“The South African government sends deepest condolences to the family and friends of Mr. Korkie for their loss. Condolences are also conveyed to the family and loved ones of the deceased American hostage,” said the government statement.

Mr. Korkie’s widow, Yolande, and their two children have gone to a secluded place to grieve, said family friend Daan Nortier.

“Yolande and the children are at a safe place and the family is being helped by counselors,” said Mr. Nortier.

Later in the day in the capital, Sanaa, gunmen at a funeral opened fire on a tribal leader aligned with ousted President Ali Abdullah Saleh, killing three of his bodyguards and wounding him, security officials said.

Sheikh Sagheer Bin Aziz was involved in fighting against Shiite Houthi rebels in 2010, who have since taken control of Sanaa. The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speak to reporters, said they believe Houthis were behind the attack.

Separately, gunmen believed to be from al Qaeda fought with government troops in the southern city of Houta, killing one soldier and wounding three as they attempted to take control of government buildings but failed, the officials said.

⦁ This story is based in part on wire service reports.