BOULDER — Colorado coach Mike MacIntyre moved into his office in the stunning new $156 million Champions Center two weeks ago. Diplomas, pictures and objects of inspiration went up on the walls last week. One corner is especially meaningful to him.

In one frame is the 1982 Bobby Dodd Coach of the Year Award presented to his father, George, when he was at Vanderbilt. “In recognition of a higher and more noble aspect of college coaching,” it says. “A style that emphasizes something more than winning. … A belief that the game of football should be kept in perspective with college life in general.”

Above that is a frame with two pictures. One shows his father coaching on the Vanderbilt sideline. Next to it is a picture of MacIntyre coaching quarterback Sefo Liufau. Above them is the word “Legacy.” Below is a Billy Graham quote: “A coach has the opportunity to impact more young people and their families in one season than the average person does in a lifetime.”

That’s what motivates MacIntyre: the opportunity to shape the lives of young men. To keep that opportunity — and the stunning view of Folsom Field that his new office affords — he has to win eventually. He has gone 6-18 in his first two seasons.

“The words I’ve used are perseverance, hope and passion,” MacIntyre said. “You’ve got to have a passion about what you do. I believe this is my calling — to coach college football. You’ve got to have hope. I see hope here — the new facility, the people we work with, the kids we’re recruiting, the involvement of the people in the community. You’ve got to persevere. If you keep your passion, you have hope, then you keep persevering. If you do those things long enough the right way, eventually you will have success.”

The third year of a head coach’s tenure often renders a pass-fail verdict, but athletic director Rick George insists he’s not putting pressure on MacIntyre.

“The most pressure on Mike is what Mike’s putting on himself,” George said. “He has done a great job, he’s doing the things we want him to do, his recruiting is improving. I think we’ve got all the elements in place to have a really good football season and to have long-term success.”

The Buffs, who open their season at Hawaii on Thursday, have 14 returning starters, including Liufau, a junior. Players are measurably bigger and stronger than last year, and there is more experienced depth. If the defense improves even a little, the Buffs should be able to do better than the 2-10 team a year ago that lost four Pac-12 conference games by 15 points.

“The league we play in is very good,” MacIntyre said. “We took a good step last year. For us to be successful, we have to take a leap in our conference. That’s what I believe will happen, and we’ll win a lot of the close games we lost last year.”

The offense returns six starters, including outstanding receivers in Nelson Spruce and Shay Fields.

“It was a very good offense last year,” MacIntyre said. “I think it should be an excellent offense this year. We have a quarterback who’s played a lot of football games who is big, strong, powerful and smart. When you have a quality quarterback, you have a good opportunity to win games.”

MacIntyre sees a confidence in his players that wasn’t there a year ago.

“I hear it in them, I see it in them, I see it in their work ethic,” MacIntyre said. “It’s gone from ‘Can we beat them?’ to ‘Can they beat us?’ It’s not me trying to convince them anymore. That’s a totally different mind-set.”

George said he believes CU is “poised to have success,” acknowledging there wasn’t much talent when MacIntyre took over after Jon Embree went 4-21 in 2011-12.

“In year one, we weren’t as competitive as I’d like us to be, but we won four football games,” George said. “Last year, we were more competitive, but we didn’t win football games. Now we’ve got to be even more competitive and win football games. Being close isn’t good enough — we’ve got to win football games. That’s what’s going to propel this athletic department. I think we’ve got the right guy in place to do that.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer