The line that formed at midnight outside the Webster Bank Arena in Bridgeport, Conn., wasn't for concert tickets or a sporting event. It was for the free two-day dental clinic last year known as the Connecticut Mission of Mercy, and participants lined up six hours before the doors opened.

It's clear from examples like this that the need for oral health care is still great. That's because there are many barriers to dental care for uninsured and underinsured populations. For example, the dental sections in Medicaid and the State Children's Health Insurance Programs (SCHIP) in New Jersey, or the Husky program in Connecticut, rarely have enough money budgeted to cover dental needs. Patients covered under public programs face additional hurdles, such as lack of dentists who accept Medicaid, transportation to get to the dentist, or the cost of missing work to do so. Many states don't even provide adult dental coverage, and it's not required under the Affordable Care Act.

That's why the Delta Dental of New Jersey Foundation has pledged over $800,000 in grants awarded to 33 community programs in New Jersey and Connecticut for 2014. A goal of the grants is to reduce the number of complex and urgent dental cases resulting from the lack of preventive care, catching problems earlier to reduce complications later. The funds are designed to help the uninsured and under insured, specifically children whose families are at or below the federal poverty level, the developmentally disabled, and vulnerable seniors.

I'm pleased to share with you the 2014 grant recipients, listed by category below. For recipients by county, and more on the history of the Foundation's grants, see our press release . If you or someone you know is in need of dental care, please refer to the New Jersey Division of Family Health Service 2012 dental clinic directory





Children

American Academy of Pediatrics – NJ Chapter (Hamilton, NJ): Provide educational sessions for Cumberland County based pediatricians to integrate oral health assessments into children's wellness exams.

Boys & Girls Club of Newark (Newark, NJ) Provide support for the Children's Dental Center, a free dental clinic at the Central Ward Clubhouse.

East Orange Department of Health & Human Services (East Orange, NJ): Fund the purchase of a digital radiograph unit to support children's dental care.

EASTCONN Head Start (Hampton, CT): Provide preventive and restorative dental care for Head Start children via the Across the Smiles dental van and a pediatric dentist.

Hospital for Special Care (New Britain, CT): Fund dental treatment and supplies for children.

Hudson County Dental Society (Union City, NJ): Provide free dental care to children by volunteer dentists during Give Kids a Smile Day.

Kids Corporation II (Newark, NJ): Provide free dental exams, education, and follow-up dental care to Newark students, as part of the Kids Camp Health Clinic.

KinderSmile Foundation (Upper Montclair, NJ): Provide dental care and education for Head Start and elementary school children.

Morristown Medical Center, Healthy Smiles, Happy Kids (Morristown, NJ): Support dental care for children under the age of 18.

Newark Beth Israel Medical Center (Newark, NJ): Provide oral care as part of pregnancy care to a patient base that rarely seeks dental services.

Ocean Health Initiatives (Lakewood, NJ): Fund children's dental care through school-based health centers in Ocean County.

Paterson Public Schools Dental Clinic (Paterson, NJ): Support dental care to allow uninsured schoolchildren in Paterson to receive free dental treatment.

Rutgers School of Nursing (New Brunswick, NJ): Facilitate the Rutgers nursing faculty and students to work with pediatric and general dentists to conduct pediatric oral health risk assessments and screenings on pre-school and early elementary school children in urban areas.

Stratford Health Department, School-Based Dental Clinic (Stratford, CT): Support the mobile dental clinic to expand dental care to underinsured, school-age children.

Tri-County Head Start Community Action Agency, T/A Gateway Community Action Partnership (Bridgeton, NJ): Fund Community Connections for Bright Smiles program, covering the cost of oral exams, preventive care, and education for Head Start children.

Virtua Health Foundation (Camden, NJ): Fund dental care for developmentally disabled persons through purchasing a mobile operating room unit.

Zufall Health Center (Dover, NJ): Support and expand Zufall's pediatric dental program for underinsured children.





Seniors

Cathedral Kitchen (Camden, NJ): Provide free, critical dental care through its Project Smiles Dental Clinic for "soup kitchen" dinner guests, as well as the homeless in Camden County.

Community Health Center (Middletown, CT): Fund direct patient care costs for senior citizens' dental treatment.

Dental Lifeline Network (NJ): Provide free dental care to aged, disabled or medically-at-risk New Jersey residents who cannot afford or access treatment.

Jazz Bridge Project (NJ): Provide restorative dental care for senior jazz musicians in need in South Jersey communities.

Jersey Shore University Medical Center Dental Clinic (Neptune, NJ): Remove seniors, primarily in Asbury Park and Neptune, from the new-appointment four-year waiting list and provide them with preventive and restorative care including removable dentures at the only charity care dental clinic in the region.

JFK Medical Center/Community Hospital Group (Edison, NJ): Improve quality of life for seniors suffering from tooth decay who have gone without dental care for years.

Morristown Medical Center, Senior Smiles Program (Morristown, NJ): Fund the supplies and lab fees that allow comprehensive, no-cost dental services for the area's charity care geriatric patients.

Overlook Foundation (Summit, NJ): Fund the purchase of dental equipment to help provide dental services to seniors and developmentally disabled patients.

Rutgers University Foundation (Newark, NJ): Provide dentures to edentulous seniors in Burlington, Camden, Cumberland, Gloucester, Atlantic, Cape May, and Salem counties.

University of Connecticut (Farmington, CT): Provide dental care for up to 80 emergency room presenting, charity care seniors, as well as provide follow-up education to establish routine dental care.

Developmentally Disabled

Eva's Village (Paterson, NJ): Provide free dental care to the area's homeless, recovering addicts, uninsured, underinsured, and working poor, many of whom have not seen a dentist in 20 years.

Morristown Medical Center, Dental Program for Persons with Developmental Disabilities (Morristown, NJ): Provide free dental care to developmentally disabled populations at the Leonard Szerlip Dental Center.

Matheny Medical and Educational Center (Peapack, NJ): Provide specialized dental services and preventive care to children and adults with complex developmental disabilities.

Norwalk Hospital (Norwalk, CT): Support dental care for developmentally disabled patients.

University of Bridgeport (Bridgeport, CT): Provide funds to support dental care for special needs children, as well as support the school-based dental clinic services.





All

Connecticut Foundation for Dental Outreach (Southington, CT): Purchase equipment, supplies, and training for the Connecticut Mission of Mercy program's free two-day dental clinic.

For more information about Delta Dental of New Jersey, visit our website, "Like" the Delta Dental of New Jersey Facebook page, follow us on Twitter and subscribe to our YouTube channel.