Volunteers Wayne Bouvier, Mary Wright and JoAnna Klein tend a vat of dumplings during the 57th annual St. Joe Hill Turkey Shoot, Chicken Dinner & Fall Festival at St. Joseph Hill Catholic Church in Sellersburg. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) October 5, 2014.

Thousands turned out to enjoy the 57th annual St. Joe Hill Turkey Shoot, Chicken Dinner & Fall Festival at St. Joseph Hill Catholic Church in Sellersburg on Sunday.

“It’s like a homecoming for a lot of people,” said event co-chair Margaret Popp Tschaenn. “It’s like a family tradition.”

Tschaenn and her sister, Darlene Popp Coleman, have co-chaired the festival – the church’s biggest fundraiser each year - for 19 years. “With beautiful weather like this, we’re hoping this will be our best year ever,” Tschaenn said.

“I can’t say which part of the event brings in the most money,” she said. “Every part of the festival is popular.”

Guests could feast on fried chicken, green beans, dumplings, and a plethora of desserts. The meal draws big crowds every year, with around 2,500 meals served last year.

Volunteers started cooking at 5 a.m. to prepare for the onslaught of visitors starting at 11 a.m. “We bought 46 cases of chicken,” said Dave Yost, chief chicken fryer for the event. “Every year it’s a little bit more.”

Yost and his team set up a series of deep fryers in an outbuilding, cooking chicken assembly line style, while just outside another team tended to large vats of green beans. In the church’s kitchen, five vats of dumplings were kept at a constant simmer and stirred with large paddles, all to sate the hungry crowds.

Molly Harrington said she comes every year. “I’ve already won a cake and now we’re going to eat dinner,” she said. “We come every year and we love it. The dumplings are to die for.”

Booths offered a number of wheels of chance and other carnival-style games, along with the quilt booth where a number of quilts handcrafted by parishioners throughout the year were raffled off.

Behind the church, shooters lined up 16 at a time and at $2 a shot to participate in the turkey shoot. Participants shoot for turkeys, rather than at them, with the winner of each round receiving their choice of a frozen bird or $13 grocery gift card.

Felix Hensley came from New Washington to participate in the turkey shoot. “It’s a good cause,” he said. “It’s not about winning. It’s just about community.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1xescyw