Many employers are adding more benefits and perks for workers. iStock

Wage growth is weak, but employers are using benefits packages to improve compensation and keep workers from jumping ship.

As the labor market improves and companies get more aggressive about retaining workers, employers are offering a wider range of benefits and perks, according to new research.

But the generosity has its limits. Firms are grappling with the effects of federal health care reform, and while they are largely still offering health insurance, they are shifting more of the costs to employees.

Some 35% of employers increased their benefits offerings overall for 2015, compared to 28% increasing benefits last year, according to the survey of more than 450 employers of all sizes by the Society for Human Resource Management, or SHRM. Only 7% of firms decreased their benefits packages from last year, compared to the 9% that cut benefits a year earlier.

Employers offer hundreds of different types of benefits for their workers, ranging from health insurance and gym subsidies to corporate cafeterias.

The increased benefits offerings come as pay has barely budged in many sectors of the U.S. economy, so a competitive benefits package helps employers attract and keep workers, says Evren Esen, director of survey programs at SHRM.

The study tracked which types of benefits were on the rise and which were declining. Among the benefits increasing in popularity for businesses were consumer-driven health care plans such as health-savings accounts, one-on-one investment advice and Roth 401(k)s. Decreasing benefits include subsidized employee cafeterias and payroll advances.

Some of the biggest benefits shifts occurred in how employers provided health coverage, as firms struggle with how to implement the requirements of the federal Affordable Care Act, now more entrenched as a result of last week’s Supreme Court ruling.

Few employers are eliminating health care coverage as a result of federal health care reforms. Instead, to help reduce costs, more firms are changing how their health care plans are composed, shifting a greater burden of costs onto employees. For instance, 43% of employers now offer health-savings accounts (HSAs), tax-advantaged accounts in which workers save money to help pay for health expenses, compared to 35% five years ago. But 30% of employers also contribute to workers’ HSAs, compared to 20% five years ago.

The survey also found that firms are offering new benefits that weren’t on most companies’ radar screens in previous years. Among these emerging benefits are company-provided fitness bands or activity trackers (offered by 13% of firms), egg-freezing for non medical reasons (2%), paid surrogacy leave (5%), company-organized fitness competitions (34%) and company-provided student loan repayment (3%).