Last week we collectively shook our heads over Luis Lang, the anti-Obamacare man from South Carolina who chose not to sign up for the Affordable Care Act but now wants coverage to stave off impending blindness. Apparently Lang, a lifelong Republican, has now decided that the party that has so consistently rejected the Affordable Care Act is no longer the party that represents his best interests.

"Now that I'm looking at what each party represents," Lang told ThinkProgress, "my wife and I are both saying — hey, we're not Republicans!" He also reportedly said that he'd be willing to tear up his voter registration card on national television to show his break with the party.

I'm not sure the GOP will care that he's departing. If the GOP doesn't care about providing health coverage to working people who otherwise can't afford it, then surely its leaders won't care about a disaffected Republican couple breaking ranks. Certainly the South Carolina Republicans who rejected Medicaid expansion in that state will be as heartless now as they were before the Langs' story became known.

Lang declined to sign up for coverage during the Affordable Care Act enrollment period. But for some reason he thought that if he got sick, he could still get all the medical help he needed. He's a diabetic who's had a series of strokes. A doctor says he'll go blind if he doesn't have an expensive operation.

What bothers me most about Lang is not that he has had a change of heart; it's that his change of heart has been driven solely by his misfortune. He thinks the Republicans are wrong because they opposed a law that he now sees would help him; but before he needed such help, he was all in the Republicans' corner.

Is it overstating things to say that the Republicans encourage such selfishness, that the party encourages its voters to go to the polls and vote only for the policies that benefit them personally? Doesn't the party discourage concern for people who may need the government's help?

I think it does, and I think Lang's departure from the Republican Party shows the problem with such thinking. The help you'd deny somebody else could be the help you need yourself.

Jarvis DeBerry can be reached at jdeberry@nola.com. Follow him at twitter.com/jarvisdeberry.