The Newnan Times-Herald Pictured from left to right are Joe Jones, Jan Blakney and Jil Daniel. Jones and Blakney are Daniel’s siblings and they will be her caregivers.

Local business owner Linda Edmonds is hosting a fundraiser to help a Coweta County resident raise money for a lung transplant.



The fundraiser involves voting on children’s’ photos through Edmonds' studio, Precious Memories Portraits.

Jil Daniel was diagnosed with Pulmonary Fibrosis in February 2015. The disease causes scarring of the lungs, which makes it difficult to breathe. There is no cure, but treatment can slow the scarring of the lungs.

“We’ve been friends for a long time,” said Edmonds. “I wanted to do something to help her.”

Daniel said that she had been seeing the signs of the disease since 2010.

“I would be very tired just going up and down stairs,” said Daniel. “In 2014, I insisted on a lung biopsy. When I received my diagnosis, I thought I had dodged the bullet because it wasn’t cancer , but then I found out it was terminal. I am on oxygen all the time now.

Daniel said that three months after her diagnosis, her local pulmonary specialist told her they would just keep her comfortable.

“I started doing some research on my own and called Duke University about a lung transplant,” said Daniel. “I’m on the path to a transplant. My lungs are still good at the moment. “

Daniel said that the transplant could cost up to $1 million with insurance covering 80 percent of the costs. Daniel also said she is looking to travel to Duke University in North Carolina anytime between March until the end of August.

“The doctors said I probably won’t be up to doing anything for a month after surgery,” said Daniel. “It’s absolutely fabulous what Linda is doing. We will be hosting additional fundraisers to help with expenses as well. My brother Joe Jones is a retired RN and he will be my primary caregiver. My sister Jan Blakney is the executive assistant for a surgeon and she will be my secondary caregiver. I’m so lucky they have altered their lives for me.”

The rules for the 2016 Essence of Childhood Contest are as follows:

The entry fee is $25.

Contestants must use a photo of their child(ren) that has been taken by Precious Memories Photography.

Anyone can vote on their favorite portrait(s) for $1 per vote. The top 20 portraits will be determined by the votes. Voting will last about three weeks.

Six winning images will then be selected and judged by a panel of three to five judges based on how well the portrait displays the essence of childhood.

The grand prize winner will receive a 16 x 20 linen portrait of their winning image and $100 Baby Dimensions gift certificate.

The five runner-ups will receive a 11 x 14 linen portrait of their winning image and a $50 Baby Dimension gift certificate.

All entries must be submitted by March 4.

“All of the proceeds from the voting will go to Jil,” said Edmonds.

For more information, contact Edmonds at 770-254-9660.

Uncle Maddio’s Pizza is also hosting a fundraiser on Thursday, Feb. 18 from 5-8 p.m. Customers must indicate they’re there for Jil’s event and 10 percent of the proceeds will be donated to her.