PEORIA — There was Melanie McNulty, the Bartonville woman who said an orthodontist squeezed her braces so tight he cracked all her teeth, leaving them so sensitive she cannot eat or drink anything unless it’s lukewarm.

Mary Jo Agles of Morton is a part-time office worker with good health insurance but no dental or vision insurance. She’s had a toothache for four months, and the pain medications she takes are eating away stomach lining.

No matter what the dental horror story — and there were stories of botched dental work and plenty more of difficulties finding affordable care or dentists willing to accept Medicaid — people at Peoria’s first Mission of Mercy had nothing but gratitude for the dental volunteers at the massive makeshift free dental clinic that began Friday at the Civic Center. Doors open again at 6 a.m. Saturday.

“If I had to wait sun up to sun down, I’d do it,” said Gwendolyn Young of Bloomington, who took a day off work.

“This came right on time,” said Peorian Ken Knight, a U.S. Marine Corps veteran of the Vietnam War and retired construction worker who camped inside the Civic Center overnight to be first in line when doors opened at 6 a.m. He had been nursing toothaches with over-the-counter pain medication for months.

Whether providence or coincidence, a military veteran first in line at a free dental clinic shines a piercing light into the dark holes in the nation’s health care system. The Illinois State Dental Society Foundation began sponsoring the first-come, first-serve clinics in 2010 to highlight the need for affordable, accessible dental care and to influence public policy.

While the Veterans’ Administration only provides dental care to veterans with service-related disabilities or those who are homeless, the Affordable Care Act doesn’t address adult dental care at all.

That’s not likely to change soon, said U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin as he greeted volunteers and patients Friday.

“I think we should treat dental care like all other forms of medical care,” Durbin said. “I think we should expand the Affordable Care Act to include it, but it’s going to take some time.”

Many of the dentists volunteering at Mission of Mercy do not accept Medicaid. They say Illinois’ reimbursement rates are too low to break even.

Illinois will reinstitute Medicaid coverage for non-emergency adult dental care Oct. 1 after cutting it in a round of reforms two years ago. But sticky issues, such as reimbursement rates and what procedures will be covered, haven’t been worked out yet, Howell said.

Meanwhile, Mission of Mercy volunteers provided basic extractions, fillings, cleanings and limited root canals for adults and children.

About 1,100 people, some from as far away as Iowa, had come through the doors by 1 p.m. Friday, forcing the clinic to stop accepting new patients for the day. Mission of Mercy clinics prepare to treat 1,000 patients a day.

Two people of about a dozen people who were turned away decided they’d wait at the Civic Center for the second day of treatment.

Roy Allen of Peoria was among those turned away. He decided he’d wait at the Civic Center because otherwise he wouldn’t get there early enough using public transportation.

Joann Kim of Peoria also decided to wait.

“This a my idea of camping out,” she said. “To get about $300 worth of free dental care, I can wait 15 hours.”

Allen will be first in line Saturday, Kim will be second. She’s a veteran of the U.S. Women’s Army Corps.

Pam Adams can be reached at 686-3245 or padams@pjstar.com. Follow her on Twitter @padamspam.