The breach cut in half the number of health care facilities in network for Sendero plan members.

Sendero ended its contract with Seton in November in a dispute over how much to pay for services.

About 10,000 Central Texans insured by Sendero Health Plans will once again have access to Seton Healthcare Family facilities and doctors, officials said Monday.

Sendero parted ways with Seton, Central Texas’ largest health care provider, in November in a dispute over how much the plan was paying Seton for health care services. The breach cut in half the number of hospitals available to adults and children in Sendero’s state-sponsored Medicaid plan, the Children’s Health Insurance Program and the federal Affordable Care Act plan.

In all, Sendero patients lost network access to 11 Seton hospitals and four outpatient facilities.

“They were able to come to an agreement on the rates on both sides,” said Monica Crowley, spokeswoman for Central Health, Travis County’s public hospital district.

Central Health created the nonprofit Sendero, which opened four years ago and has struggled financially ever since in competition with three other Austin-area health plans.

+ Central Health is Travis County’s hospital district, which oversees programs for health care services for the county’s poor, uninsured and underinsured ... read more ×

Central Health has transferred $45.9 million in taxpayer money into the nonprofit to pay claims and satisfy state requirements for Medicaid HMO balances, officials said in November. In the current budget year, Central Health has pledged an additional $5 million, if Sendero needs it.

Sendero members covered by the Medicaid HMO and CHIP now have in-network access to Seton facilities, Crowley said. Those covered by IdealCare, the ACA plan, will rejoin the Seton network starting May 1, she said.

About 10,000 Central Texans in eight counties, including Travis, Williamson and Hays, are Sendero members.

The payment dispute added a new layer of complexity to the Seton-Central Health relationship. The two are close partners and cooperate on a nonprofit that oversees health care delivery to needy residents.

Central Health President and CEO Patricia Young Brown said in a written statement she was pleased that Seton and Sendero had reached an agreement.

“Since Sendero’s creation, we have strived to ensure that Sendero members have access to the best possible care,” she said. “Including partners like Seton in the Sendero network, is one example of how your local, non-profit, community health plan is doing just that.”

Central Health officials don’t disclose financial details, including rates, for competitive reasons.