RICHMOND — Being lieutenant governor means that every once in a while, you get to stand in for the governor and take on important jobs, such as commemorating the birthday of Smokey Bear.

Ralph Northam, who occupies the part-time, second-fiddle state government post, doesn’t mind. When you want to run for governor, it comes with the territory — and Northam, despite his mild manner and humble bearing, is getting used to the ceremonial shtick.

Witness Monday, Nov. 16, when he was asked to stand in for Gov. Terry McAuliffe, Virginia’s hyperbolic cheerleader-in-chief, at the Virginia Tourism Summit in Richmond. McAuliffe was on an economic development trip to India and the Middle East.

Northam, 56, did not try to do an impression of the governor. Rather, in his trademark understated and dry delivery, he imagined out-of-state travelers enjoying a glass of Virginia wine, or pint of craft beer, or a spirit distilled in the commonwealth, followed by a selection of freshly shucked Virginia oysters.

Put all those together, he said, “and good things are going to happen.”

The audience of tourism professionals erupted in laughter and later gave Northam a standing ovation when he left the stage.

Keeping his day job as a physician

The election for governor is two years away, but both parties and their presumptive front-running candidates already are laying the groundwork for their campaigns.

Ed Gillespie, who came close to knocking off U.S. Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va., last year, has announced his intention to seek the GOP nomination and actively campaigned for Republican legislative candidates this year.

And after Attorney General Mark Herring’s decision to seek re-election rather than the Democratic nomination for governor, Northam has marshaled his resources into building a coalition of support, hiring staff and raising money for a general election run.

Despite the shift into a more prominent and public political role, Northam — an Eastern Shore native, Virginia Military Institute graduate and U.S. Army veteran — still is firmly rooted in his day job as a physician.

As a pediatric neurologist, Northam spends his week seeing patients in Norfolk at the Children’s Hospital of The King’s Daughters. Providing care is what drew him to Warsaw last weekend for a 13-hour day seeing patients among the more than 600 people who turned up for free medical care that they otherwise could not afford.

And it’s what drives his support for finding a political solution that would allow the state to tap into taxpayer dollars Virginians already have paid to the federal government in order to expand Medicaid coverage to about 400,000 uninsured Virginians.

“The idea of the RAM (Remote Area Medical) clinics is great ... but it’s not the optimal way of taking care of someone with health care issues,” Northam said in an interview.

Northam, whose mother was a nurse and whose son is a new physician doing resident training in North Carolina, said he has spoken with other physicians in the legislature, but they do not want any part of the issue.

“A third of our hospitals are in the red; we are trying to build our economy,” he said. “Their response was that 2016 is a presidential election — anything that has to do with the Affordable Care Act is going to be a non-starter.

“They said they are going to support the free clinics in Virginia,” Northam continued. “That’s not a good option, in my opinion.”

Hard to raise profilein faceless role

Northam said economic development and job creation will be at the top of his list once the political spotlight turns his way after the November 2016 presidential elections. But not far behind will be the priorities that speak to his life experience — help for veterans and workforce development — and his job as a doctor.

If he were elected, Northam would be the first physician governor in modern Virginia history. (John Floyd, namesake of Floyd County, was a surgeon, a state delegate and a member of the U.S. House of Representatives before he served as Virginia’s 25th governor from 1830 to 1834.)Northam’s prescription for success will, at the very least, require him to hang out a very big shingle.

A recent survey by the University of Mary Washington showed Gillespie leading in a hypothetical 2017 matchup with Northam, 40 percent to 33 percent. But more telling was the fact that 82 percent of voters surveyed said they did not know enough about Northam, a former state senator, to form an opinion.

Gillespie did not fare much better, with 77 percent saying they do not know enough about him, despite his close run for U.S. Senate against Warner last year.

“The biggest challenge that you face is that the office of lieutenant governor is, for the most part, a very innocuous office,” former Lt. Gov. Bill Bolling said.

Bolling served eight years in the post before deciding not to seek a third term and opting not to seek the GOP nomination for governor in the 2013 party convention.

He was among the more visible and consequential lieutenant governors in recent years, by taking on the additional role of chief jobs creation officer handed him by then-Gov. Bob McDonnell.

Still, Bolling said, “Nobody knew who I was.”

“Ralph is a great guy,” Bolling said. “I like him a lot, but he’s a very laid-back personality, and he’s serving with a governor who sucks all the oxygen out of the room. Those are the challenges he’s going to face.

“His biggest plus is that he’s a genuinely nice guy, a good and decent person. On the other hand, he has not been particularly visible and, therefore, he’s going to have to spend a lot of time introducing himself to voters.”

In making that introduction, Northam should be himself, said Larry Sabato, director of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia.

“I’ve generally found it to be unhelpful — and sometimes deadly — when a candidate decides to be someone he or she is not,” he said. “Northam is what he is, and he should run that way.”

Sabato said a candidate can have a low-key approach and still emphasize issues that matter to the base. The key is how organized and energetic that base becomes in driving voter turnout in an off-year election, and how the electorate feels about the party in power — in Washington and in Richmond.

“Ralph Northam is in many ways a generic Democratic candidate, and party label is going to have more impact on the results than the fact he’s low-key, or a doctor, or from Tidewater, just to mention three other factors,” Sabato said.

“I believe Ed Gillespie is pretty much the same — he is fundamentally a generic Republican and, in the end, his party label — and where Virginians are with respect to both parties — will matter more than anything else.”

New suit of clothes, same low-key style

Northam’s approach as a senator managed to win bipartisan compromises on legislation to restrict smoking in Virginia restaurants and to set rules in schools protecting student-athletes from concussions.

Despite his demeanor, Northam is not afraid to mix it up on issues that are important to him.

As a senator, he once angrily stormed out of a Senate Education and Health Committee meeting when the Republican-controlled panel was stifling debate on legislation affecting abortion clinics.

And fresh off his visit to the RAM clinic, Northam issued a challenge, albeit civilly, to lawmakers opposed to tapping federal dollars for Medicaid expansion.

“I would tell them to come to the RAM clinic and bring their families and ask, ‘Is this where I would choose to have my family go when they’re sick, once a year?’ “ he said.

“If we would sit down at the table and put our political differences aside and say, ‘How can we take care of these individuals?’ ... We can do better in Virginia.”

Sometime after the presidential election, Northam said he will take a sabbatical from his medical practice to concentrate full time on his campaign for governor.

That will mean more opportunities to raise his profile by doing what lieutenant governors do when they are not presiding over the Virginia Senate — more rubber-chicken dinner fundraisers, more photo ops with Smokey Bear.

Picking up on a snarky observation about his sartorial style in a recent story, Northam went out and got a new suit, which he wore to the tourism summit.

“The suit fits, but the shirt sleeves are too long,” he said, making fun of his efforts. But few doubt Northam will change on the inside in his quest to pay a house call to the Executive Mansion.

Chief of Staff Clark Mercer recalled Northam’s opportunity to address the crowd at Richmond International Raceway. Rather than deliver a political pitch, the racing fan dropped a line from the Will Farrell NASCAR movie comedy “Talladega Nights.”

“Shake and bake!” he said.

Judging from the response, it seemed just what the doctor ordered.