When is an option not really optional? When the government is involved.

As the proposed End of Life Option Act gallops through the California Legislature like a headless horseman, we should carefully think through the consequences of creating a right for terminally ill people to receive fatal medication for use at a future time.

Supporters of the bill point to Oregon’s 1997 Death with Dignity Act (DWDA) as a model for California, but a close look at Oregon’s data tells a troubling story.

Oregon’s Public Health Division says 1,327 people have received DWDA prescriptions since the law was passed, and 859 patients have died from ingesting the drugs.

California’s population is 10 times that of its neighbor to the north. How many people will obtain these drugs and not take them? What if the drugs are stolen? The proposed law would allow the deadly medication to be delivered to patients by UPS, FedEx or the U.S. Postal Service. If identities can be stolen from tax forms and allergy medicine can be used to make meth, how risky is it to mail out drugs intended to kill people?

But the greatest risk is not from thieves.

This is a dangerous time to allow government bureaucrats to implement an aid-in-dying law. The Affordable Care Act has changed everything, and more people than ever have health insurance through the government. In Oregon, 150,000 new enrollees were added to the state’s Medicaid program in 2014, projected to rise to 257,000 in 2016. In California, the numbers are in the millions and the cost is in the billions.

Prior to 2014, Oregon residents with government insurance made up only 35.5 percent of the patients who requested DWDA prescriptions. In 2014, that number jumped to over 60 percent.

Coincidence? Or cost-cutting? Are patients with government insurance receiving more persuasive counseling toward suicide than patients with private insurance?

Perhaps we’re seeing a hint of future coaxing in one recent change to the California bill, softening the disclosure that lethal medicine may not be fast-acting.

The original bill included language identical to the Oregon law, which requires patients to sign a statement saying they understand that “although most deaths occur within three hours, my death may take longer and my physician has counseled me about that possibility.”

California lawmakers replaced the unpleasant “may take longer” than three hours with “may not be immediately upon the consumption of the medication.” But Oregon’s grim statistics document that death has taken as long as 104 hours, and six people regained consciousness after taking the drugs.

Oregon’s statistics also reveal that concern about pain was cited by less than a third of patients as the reason for seeking aid-in-dying. Over 90 percent cited “losing autonomy,” with “less able to engage in activities making life enjoyable” and “loss of dignity” mentioned nearly as often.

Advertisement

Why have lawmakers chosen this moment to legalize fatal drugs instead of expanding treatment for depression or support for assisted living? Is it because Medi-Cal is in financial trouble and a quick death costs less than end-of-life care?

It’s painful to think of bureaucratic forms and procedures that would matter-of-factly offer suicide as an option to patients still in shock from the news of a devastating diagnosis. For fragile and vulnerable people, the “option” explained in a “counseling” session could too easily be taken as a recommendation, seen as a responsibility or felt as an obligation.

For the 30 percent of Californians now on Medi-Cal, the results of the End of Life Option Act could be barbaric. We have to do better. This is not the time to legalize assisted suicide.

Susan Shelley is a San Fernando Valley author, a former television associate producer and twice a Republican candidate for the California Assembly.