More Video...

Wade Davis puts the first two runners on in the 9th but finishes off the Royals' 6-3 win over the Blue Jays for a 2-0 lead in the best-of-seven ALCS

The Royals finally broke through against David Price, rallying to take the lead in the seventh by batting around. The surge started when Ben Zobrist hit a shallow pop fly to right that second baseman Ryan Goins, running back, appeared to call for. Jose Bautista started to slow up but Goins, perhaps distracted by the loud crowd noise, stopped and slid to the ground as if he was ceding to the outfielder. Instead, the ball fell in for the Royals' first hit since Alcides Escobar singled to lead off the first.

Eric Hosmer, Kendry Morales, Mike Moustakas and Alex Gordon each drove in a run before Price was pulled. Alex Rios drove in one more run with a single off Aaron Sanchez for a 5-3 lead.

The Blue Jays' David Price has recorded 18 consecutive outs since Alcides Escobar's double on the first pitch of the bottom of the first inning of Game 2 of the ALCS.

Lest anyone think he's wearing down, Price struck out the side in the sixth.

The star turn by the big left-hander is somewhat surprising given Price had been 0-6 in his previous six postseason starts. He did pick up a pair of wins in relief.

In fact, he was so pedestrian in allowing five runs in the opening game of the divisional round that manager John Gibbons used him in relief later in the series. That is why Price was pitching in Game 2 of the ALCS rather than in Friday night's opener.

Then again, he's 2-0 in six games against the Royals, including the five-hitter that he tossed against their lefty-heavy lineup on May 2 when he was still with Detroit.

With some help from his defense, Yordano Ventura has been stingy for Kansas City in Game 2 of the ALC. In fact, the Royals' best defensive play didn't even count.

Josh Donaldson skied a popup behind home plate leading off the sixth, and it banged into the wire holding up the netting that protects the fans. Salvador Perez was tracking it the whole way, then adjusted when the ball hit the wire and made the catch with his bare hand.

Only problem? The ball hitting the wire is declared a foul.

Donaldson wound up hitting an infield single moments later. He scored on Edwin Encarnacion's single as the Blue Jays took a 3-0 lead behind some superb pitching from David Price.

Game 3 is in Toronto on Monday night.