Getty Images Could Sony 's new lenses make awkward-to-shoot shots easier?

Amid all the excitement of Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd’s headline grabbing smartwatch (this our video report), one announcement that got slightly lost was Sony Corp.’s digital SLR-quality lenses for a smartphone.

The Wall Street Journal’s Daisuke Wakabayashi reported on it Wednesday.

A lot of people have used things like the Olloclip to extend the lens options on a smartphone, but since they rely on the lens and sensors built into your smartphone, they are only as good as the phone’s existing camera.

Nokia Corp., the once mighty Finnish phone company, put a lot of work into turbo-powering the cameras on its Lumia range of Windows Phone smartphones, the top end phone, the 1020, featuring a 41 megapixel sensor and Carl Zeiss lenses.

But none solve the fundamental problem that the camera and the phone are attached to each other. What is clever about the Sony QX10 and QX100 is they divorce them — the lens talks wirelessly to the phone, in other words you can use your smartphone as a remote viewer for the camera.

Sony Corp The QX10 remote lens

While this isn’t the first time this has happened, you can do all of this with some wi-fi equipped cameras, these Sony lenses are lighter and easier to carry around.

How useful a feature this is for the average high-end amateur photographer isn’t clear, but for people who have to shoot images or video at difficult angles (think paparazzi photographers) this flexibility is a real boon. I shoot a lot of video interviews using just an iPhone and it is always a bit hit-and-miss that it will be framed properly. Being able to mount the lens on a tripod and then control it remotely would be great.

The more-expensive QX100, which will sell for $500 in the U.S., comes with the same large image sensor and image-processing engine that the company uses in the CyberShot RX100M II, one of Sony’s compact cameras. The QX10, which will sell for $250 in the U.S., has a smaller image sensor but its 10-times optical zoom is greater than the 3.6 times zoom of the QX100. Sony said they are expected to go on sale on Sept. 16 in Europe and soon thereafter in the rest of the world.

Sony produced a rather cheesy video that shows it in use.