The Ars Nova singers will open their 2015-16 season Oct. 9-10 with the program "Rachmaninoff All-Night Vigil — 100 Years." ( Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Ars Nova Singers' 2015-16 season celebrates 30 years • "Rachmaninoff All-Night Vigil — 100 Years": 7:30 p.m. Oct. 9, St. Paul's Lutheran Church, 1600 Grant St., Denver; 7:30 p.m. Oct. 10, First United Methodist Church, 1421 Spruce St., Boulder • "Happiness and Cheer: Christmas with Ars Nova": 2 p.m. Dec. 12, Bethany Lutheran Church, 4500 E. Hampden Ave., Cherry Hills Village; 4 p.m. Dec. 13, St. Paul's Lutheran, Denver; 7:30 p.m. Dec. 17-18, St. John's Episcopal Church, 1419 Pine St., Boulder • "Renaissance Retrospective": 7:30 p.m. Feb. 19, St. Paul's Lutheran, Denver; 7:30 p.m. Feb. 20, St. John's Episcopal, Boulder • "The New Art: Shared Visions": 7:30 p.m. April 29, Hamilton Hall, University of Denver Newman Center, 2344 E. Iliff Ave.; 7:30 p.m. April 30, St. John's Episcopal, Boulder Tickets: $25 adults, $20 seniors, $5 students Info: 303-499-3165 or arsnovasingers.org

As with its orchestral counterpart, Boulder's choral music scene is almost embarrassingly abundant in its diverse offerings of both ensembles and their associated styles.

The Ars Nova Singers, the unique — and elite — professional-core choir specializing in Renaissance and 20th and 21st century music is celebrating its 30th anniversary season in 2015-16.

Founding artistic director Thomas Edward Morgan has assembled a cycle of four programs meant to highlight all aspects of the group's aesthetic — one that is both retrospective, and in the case of the final concert in April, committed to the creation and performance of entirely new artistic products. The choir presents all concerts in both Denver and Boulder, with the Boulder performances always scheduled second.

The group's opening concert, Oct. 9-10, is a centennial celebration of one of the 20th century's great monuments of choral literature, the "All-Night Vigil" (sometimes, and not quite accurately, referred to as the "Vespers") by Sergei Rachmaninoff, which was premiered in Russia in 1915.

Based on the liturgy of the Russian Orthodox Church, its composition and premiere barely preceded the suppression of the same by the Bolshevik Revolution (during which Rachmaninoff emigrated from his home country).

The 15-movement work will be performed with an expanded ensemble, up to 52 singers from the group's core of 36. Several alumni singers, including Seicento Baroque Ensemble director Evanne Browne, were invited back for the performance, Morgan said, adding, "It really calls for a large, full sound."

The work's text, in Church Slavonic language, is often a challenge to performance, but Morgan said meticulous transliterations and other helps were available for the singers to re-create the sound.

"The sound of those vowels, the color of the language is really part of the piece's construction," Morgan said. "You can't really do it justice in translation."

He also said those who love Rachmaninoff through his familiar piano and orchestral music will find much to enjoy in the work.

"It's largely based on Orthodox chant, but he dresses it up in a lush, almost symphonic way," Morgan said. "The a cappella choral harmonies are extremely full, and of course there are those low bass notes, deeper than anything else in the choral repertoire."

He said the choir has several basses who are able to touch these notes in full voice and several others who can reach them thorough an "undertoning" technique.

"These 'basso profundo' sounds are so typical of Russian choral music," Morgan said.

The Boulder performance of Rachmaninoff will be at the larger First United Methodist Church instead of the choir's usual home, St. John's Episcopal Church, where the other three programs will be presented. Rachmaninoff will be played at Ars Nova's usual Denver venue, St. Paul's Lutheran Church.

The group's always-popular and special holiday concert is set for Dec. 17-18 at St. John's, Dec. 12-13 in Denver. As is typical for that concert, the choir will invite guest instrumentalists, including popular Boulder oboist James Brody.

"He has performed with us for most of our history," said Morgan, who also will invite a harp player, yet to be determined.

"This year it will be more of a retrospective," Morgan said, "including things from over 30 years of successful holiday programs."

Ars Nova will be in its most comfortable wheelhouse Feb. 19-20, at the usual venues, with a program of monumental Renaissance music "for many voices."

The era was the golden age of a cappella singing, and nowhere is the style on more opulent display than in the 40-voice motets by Thomas Tallis and Alessandro Striggio, two complex masterworks of the late 16th century.

"We will of course do them with one singer per part, surrounding the audience," Morgan said. Noting the time of year, he said there will be backups "in case somebody goes down (with illness)," since each single singer has different notes.

Filling out the program will be another Tallis masterwork, the "Lamentations of Jeremiah" and selections from Carlo Gesualdo's Responses for Holy Week.

"Gesualdo's harmonies were ahead of their time and have great appeal to the modern ear," Morgan said.

The season closes April 29-30 (the Denver venue is changed to Hamilton Hall on the University of Denver campus) with a truly unique and ambitious project, one that is currently materializing in what will be a four-stage process over the course of a year. In "Shared Visions," visual art will inspire poetry, which in turn will inspire three commissioned pieces of new choral music.

Morgan explained the process:

"It started last season by gathering 23 works from area visual artists. "We then gathered those into an online gallery." He said the painters were selected by the choir's board of directors.

"The next stage was to invite Colorado poets to view these works and create new poetry based on them."

The poems were assembled into an anthology, which was finished this month. Next, three selected composers will choose which poems to set to music. The fourth stage will be the rehearsal and performance by the choir, in which the composers will participate.

The selected composers are the University of Colorado's Daniel Kellogg, along with Naropa Univirsity's Paul Fowler and Conor Brown, a younger and highly regarded composer who recently appeared on the scene.

"We'll have them all on the scene at the concert — artists, poets, composers," Morgan said. "It's really gratifying to see this cross-pollination and the enthusiasm at all levels."

The three new works will be balanced by more familiar pieces sung by the choir over the course of its history.