Bloomberg News/Joshua Roberts The Volcker rule is a centerpiece of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, named for former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker (above).

Private equity’s secondary market is bracing for an uptick in deals thanks to the final approval of the Volcker rule.

Banks including Citigroup, Wells Fargo & Co. and J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. are only a few of the financial institutions in the process of selling large portfolios on the secondary market or considering such sales, joining early movers such as Bank of America Corp. and Credit Suisse Group.

Further discussions around bank sales began to increase after regulators released the final draft of the Volcker Rule in December, giving financial institutions the final wording on bans from making certain investments deemed to be risky, such as private equity and hedge funds. The deadline for compliance is July 21, 2015, although financial institutions may seek extensions beyond that date.

“With final rules implemented [in December] and compliance required by 2015, we’re going to see a pickup in activity,” said Rudy Scarpa, a partner on the secondary team at investment management firm Pantheon.

However, Volcker isn’t the only motivator. Pricing for private equity assets continues to further swing in favor of sellers, thanks to a combination of strong fundraising by secondary firms and solid performance of underlying private equity portfolios.

And given that bids based on portfolio valuations lag at least a quarter, some buyers may end up paying an overall discount amid rising performance numbers.

“It doesn’t change the fundamental profile of a deal,” said Jeff Keay , a managing director with HarbourVest Partners . “But on the margin, it can give a buyer a bit more comfort about what may optically feel like a high price.”

For more on the private equity secondary pipeline, check out this month’s issue of Private Equity Analyst. For a free trial, visit the website, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”

Write to Michael Wursthorn at michael.wursthorn@wsj.com. Follow him on Twitter at @4BetterOrWurst.