Rams play four true freshmen in rout over Savannah State

Colorado State defensive lineman Martavius Foster sacks Savannah State quarterback Tino Smith during the first half of Saturday's game. Foster recorded three of the Rams' six sacks in the contest. (Travis L Davis/Loveland Reporter-Herald)

FORT COLLINS — At the beginning of fall camp, Mike Bobo was worried.

The Colorado State head coach hadn't seen a pass rush develop during 15 spring practices, nor had it showed up during the first scrimmage of the fall. Meanwhile, the defensive staff kept tinkering for solutions.

"That's what the fall was there for, to work on what you need to work on," Colorado State defensive end SteveO Michel said. "We worked on it, we put an emphasis on it and we showed up."

The Rams sure did, and mostly across the defensive line, producing six sacks in a 65-13 whipping of Savannah State on Saturday at Lubick Field at Hughes Stadium.

The first sack of the day came from blitzing linebacker Kiel Robinson. The rest came from the defensive line, and they did it by rushing four.

Martavius Foster led the way to the pocket with three. Joe Kawulok and Michel each added one.

"We just worked a lot matches and switches in practice in the course of camp," Foster said. "Today we were able to capitalize on those. The nickel package is more a pass-rush type of thing, but both of us (he and Kawulok) can play the run inside. I think it works for most of us."

The formation uses both Foster and Kawulok inside at the nose and tackle positions, using Michel and Cory James (who was limited with a back ailment) on the ends. That package produced most of the push, with the Rams also pressuring SSU quarterbacks on three other occasions.

"We've got to be able to get pressure with four, and getting those speed guys on there like I mentioned, guys with foot quickness playing inside at the three-technique and the nose helped," Bobo said.

The first-year coach was particularly pleased with Foster, who as a senior hasn't played much and was slowed by a pectoral injury prior to spring camp.

Quick start

The defense needed just 47 seconds — and two awful snaps from Savannah State — to put the first points on the board. The second bad snap was recovered by Kevin Davis in the end zone, giving the Rams their first defensive touchdown in two seasons. It was the second-fastest score to open a season since 1959, with Jeremy Calhoun's 80-yard pass from Moses Moreno taking just 10 seconds in 1996. It was the first time since 1999 the defense has opened a season's scoring (54-yard interception return by Rick Crowell).

Offensively, CSU scored on its first possession, a 9-yard scoring pass from Nick Stevens to Kivon Cartwright. They drove 65 yards in five plays, needing just 43 seconds to do so.

Early action

Bobo predicted four true freshmen had a chance to play this season, and all four did in Saturday's game — receiver Olabisi Johnson, cornerback Braylin Scott, running back Izzy Matthews and offensive lineman Colby Meeks.

Johnson made his first catch memorable, turning it into a 13-yard score. Matthews finished with 53 yards on six carries, the last a 37-yard run to close the scoring.

Training room

The team was energized to have Cartwright back in the lineup, and the sixth-year senior tight end played well with three catches for 56 yards and the 9-yard touchdown for the offense's first points. But later in the first half, he was taken into the locker room and didn't return.

It was said he was kept out of the game for observation and evaluation, with no specifics for what. Bobo said he had not been updated on Cartwright's condition.

Oops

Jordon Vaden returned a second-half kickoff 99 yards, but he needed one more. He dropped the ball in celebration a line from the end zone and it scooted out of bounds for a touchback.

Bobo said he wasn't going to scold Vaden, feeling he was probably embarrassed enough, but it was definitely a teaching moment for all.

"Hopefully it will be a lesson to all of our guys for finishing every play all the way to the whistle," he said. "He's probably going to be on SportsCenter Not Top 10. He'll learn."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard