Expressing what is quickly becoming the mainstream consensus viewpoint, this week the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was the latest to pile on about defense spending shortfalls. His most glaring admission was not that dollars are in short supply, but rather that the problems confronting the military – less money and more commitments as well as shaky readiness – cannot be addressed through cap-busting war spending alone.

As Gen. Martin Dempsey told Congress, “we do have a problem, and I think it will become clear through the fall. And it’s not a problem that we can solve just with OCO, that is to say the operational contingency funds. There’s a base budget issue here too we have to get at.”

This problem is not new, but it is becoming increasingly pernicious and palpable. Another way to characterize the chairman’s assessment is what the Center for Strategic and International Studies' Clark Murdock calls the “double whammy.” This refers to a defense drawdown that is in line with historical standards but one that feels deeper given the decline in purchasing power of each U.S. defense dollar, alongside negative real growth in the budget.

[MORE: Cartoons on Defense Spending]

What was truly a “double whammy” has turned into a “triple whammy” as year after year Congress continues to reject Pentagon proposals to slow the rate of growth within the defense budget. Internal defense inflation compounds the budget squeeze by requiring additional trade-offs after many assumptions about spending crash into a brick wall of rejection on Capitol Hill.

Unfortunately, there is an emerging quadruple challenge facing the Defense Department budget to which the chairman alluded. Rebuilding readiness in a hurry costs more than the actual dollar amount harvested when it was cut in the first place to meet budget targets.

For these reasons and more, this defense drawdown has been unlike any other in modern times. It is modest in percentage and dollar terms – which temporarily masks its true consequences – but steeper in practical effect and reduced output.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Islamic State]

This means that it costs the Pentagon more to simply tread water financially these days. Rebuilding will cost even more. Any dollar given back to the military at this point is practically half spoken for, before it can even be spent. Policymakers should be clear-eyed about this fiscal reality because money alone cannot solve the Pentagon’s budget woes. Nor will simple inflation-adjusted increases be enough.

The blue ribbon National Defense Panel offered this blunt warning to politicians: “American military forces will be at high risk to accomplish the Nation’s defense strategy in the near future unless" recommendations such as repealing the Budget Control Act and passing a readiness supplemental are speedily enacted.

Listening to America’s military leadership testify about the options for defeating the Islamic State group this week, it is increasingly clear that these are not tomorrow’s problems. The heightened risk, reduced options, degraded readiness and elongated time to victory are all possible – and avoidable – consequences today. Perhaps the reality of U.S. forces returning to Iraq will be enough to reverse course and reinvest in America’s military strength.