Quietly, the names of hospital systems – PinnacleHealth, Holy Spirit – have appeared outside doctor’s offices and other medical providers throughout the region.

It was an easy thing to miss. But if you use or pay for health care — that means everyone — it will affect you.

Many of these family practices, cardiology groups, imaging centers, etc. were once independent. They provided choice and at least potential for competition.

Now they are part of hospital systems.

PinnacleHealth System, for example, absorbed the 12 offices and 65 doctors of the former Heritage Medical Group. It absorbed entities including Moffitt Heart & Vascular Group, with its two dozen cardiologists, and Susquehanna Surgeons.

Holy Spirit Health System has made similar moves, absorbing entities such as Kunkel Surgical Group and Capital Cardiovascular Associates.

Hospitals argue that such consolidation can provide a remedy for the many different “silos” which long characterized the U.S. health care system, and resulted in many mistakes and inefficiencies.

Still, there’s the disturbing fact that costs of services often rise after a hospital acquires a medical practice -- even if the only obvious change is the name on the building. Additionally, there are economic incentives to refer patients to other doctors or services within the system -- even if those services cost more or aren’t as good as those available from other health care providers.

It’s part of a wave of consolidation happening all over the country. There’s much optimism it will lead to better health care at a lower cost.

Yet history has shown that costs often go up when doctors join with hospitals.

Consolidation happening everywhere

It’s being driven by forces including the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, which are transforming the payment system so that health care providers are rewarded for taking good care of people rather than for volume. At the same time, government and private insurance company efforts to cut costs, and the lingering effects of the economic downturn, have cut into health care spending, creating a historic level of pressure on hospitals and doctors to operate more efficiently.

These have encouraged hospital systems to offer the full range of health care services — from the intensive care unit to the family doctor to the blood lab.

PinnacleHealth, for example, wants a PinnacleHealth family doctor within ten minutes of everyone in the region, PinnacleHealth specialists and services such as blood labs within 20 minutes, and a PinnacleHealth hospital within 30 minutes.

That’s why the Harrisburg-based system is building a hospital in Hampden Twp., just a few miles from Holy Spirit Hospital.

Many doctors give up independence

One historic aspect of the landscape shift is the flow of doctors into employment by hospitals and hospital systems.

Traditionally, most doctors worked in privately-owned solo or group practices. They had privileges at one or more hospitals, but didn’t work for the hospital. The main exceptions were academic medical centers such as Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, which always employed its doctors.

Five years ago, about 75 percent of Pennsylvania doctors were independent, according to Dr. C. Richard Schott, a former president of the Pennsylvania Medical Society. Today, an estimated 60-70 percent are employed by a hospital or hospital system, he said.

“A lot of people don’t realize how many physicians are now employed by these systems,” says Mike Fiaschetti, president for health markets for health insurer Highmark Inc.

Multiple forces are pushing doctors to health systems. Many younger doctors prefer a regular schedule and relief from on-call demands of a smaller practice. More than half of new doctors are women, who place high value on work-life balance and family life. Medical malpractice insurance costs are a factor.

So is the new emphasis on concepts such as “medical homes” and “accountable care” organizations. These are being pushed by the Affordable Care Act, Medicare and private insurers. They reward doctors and teams of health care workers for coordinating care of patients and trying to keep them healthy.

It’s not impossible for independent practices to be involved. But it can require outside expertise, more staff and expensive technology, which can be difficult for smaller entities to afford.

For patients, a potential downside is they might not be able to consistently see the same doctor, or the doctor of their choice. Moreover, some doctors worry about being pressured to see more and more patients, or being forced to practice medicine according to corporate dictates.

Health systems argue such integration has many advantages over the old, fragmented system.

PinnacleHealth spokeswoman Kelly McCall said, “we strongly believe that integration leads to better coordination of care and reduces duplication and unnecessary admissions, thus lowering costs. PinnacleHealth recognizes that increasing healthcare costs are not sustainable and has developed a focus and a system designed to provide high quality care while reducing costs.”

History of previous integration gives cause for concern

A burst of hospital-doctor integration took place during the 1990s. Various studies have looked at the results.

A widely-cited study by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation concluded the integration didn’t result in efficiency and savings. The authors wrote, “In theory, there are substantial gains to be made from consolidation. However, there are also concerns that consolidation may have adverse affects on competition. Consolidation can simply be an attempt by providers to enhance bargaining power [over] insurers.”

Robert Town, one of the authors, says, “I don’t think there’s any great evidence that it’s really beneficial to consumers in the end … I haven’t seen any evidence to suggest that there’s cause for optimism.”

When a hospital system affixes its name, charges can rise

Medicare often pays hospitals more for a given procedure than when the same thing is done in the office of an independent doctor.

As hospital systems acquire practices, they can label it an “outpatient” department of the hospital and charge the hospital price.

For example, Medicare pays $58 for a 15-minute doctor’s visit in an independent practice. It pays $98.70 when the same visit takes place at a location that’s part of a hospital. The patient’s portion of the bill rises from $14.50 to $24.68. Similarly, Medicare pays $188 for a type of echocardiogram when done at a doctor’s office and $452 when done at a hospital-owned entity.

Insurers say this causes health insurance premiums to rise. “The cost of those procedures can go up 50 percent, 200 percent, and that absolutely does happen,” says Matt Vogel of Highmark Blue Shield. “The name outside the building changes, the quality doesn’t change.”

Some hospitals systems add extra charges in the form of a “facility fee.”

State Rep. Dan Frankel, D-Allegheny County, has introduced a bill that would require health care facilities to disclose all such fees up front, while the patient still has a chance to go elsewhere.

Four central Pennsylvania health systems contacted for this story acknowledged that costs can go up after they acquire an entity, although they also said costs sometimes go down. Several said the extra costs are rolled into the overall bill, and not passed along in the form of a facility fee.

Mike Johnson, the chief financial officer of Carlisle Regional Medical Center, said “in most instances it’s typically higher, because our costs are higher.”

Johnson explained that different, more expensive regulations pertain to hospitals and hospital-owned entities. In addition, hospital facilities often deal with sicker patients and thus need emergency response capacity. When a hospital acquires a practice, it often makes significant investments to electronically connect it to the hospital, to satisfy regulations, and to improve the level of service to patients.

“Essentially, it costs the hospital more to open up a department of the hospital than it would if the physician just did it on their own,” Johnson says.

Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center on its website informs Medicare patients they “will incur a coinsurance liability to the hospital that they would not incur if the facility were not hospital-based.” This applies to numerous Penn State Hershey Medical Group locations.

A spokesman said the extra charge is needed to “recover a greater percentage of our costs from Medicare. This is especially important because Medicare reimburses us for significantly less than our actual costs of providing care.”

Still, a commission that advises Medicare recently identified a list of procedures that should cost no more at a hospital than at a doctor’s office, and recommended eliminating higher payments to hospital-owned facilities.