By Daniel Nebert, MD, and Andrew Monte, MD

Many of us have a family member or have known a neighbor's child, who – at age 10 or 12 – were "excited about life and full of motivation and aspirations." The child then began smoking marijuana during adolescence. By age 20, this same child is now a "laid-back" young adult who has lost the goals and enthusiasm he once had.

Which came first, chicken or the egg? Did the child first lose interest in life and therefore begin smoking pot? Or did marijuana usage during teenage years lead to loss of ambition and drive?

Scientists often use laboratory animal models to understand disease. In 2013 Maryland researchers demonstrated in mice that chronic marijuana exposure during adolescence permanently impairs mental processes of "awareness, perception, reasoning, and judgment" and increases risk of schizophrenia. Numerous studies in rodents have shown similar results of irreversible brain damage.

Although research in rodents cannot always be extrapolated to humans, last January Switzerland scientists showed convincingly that marijuana effects in mice are very likely relevant to humans. Using a highly precise neuro-imaging technique called voxel-based morphometry (VBM), the investigators measured specific brain cell changes in a group of regular cannabis smokers, compared to a group of occasional smokers matched by years of pot usage.

VBM eliminates the large differences in brain anatomy among people. The image volume is then contrasted across brains at every voxel, so that local concentrations of grey-matter (brain regions containing nerve cell bodies) between any two groups can be compared.

The Swiss study provided persuasive evidence that daily marijuana is associated with less grey matter volume in specific brain regions associated with "motivation, emotion, and affective processing." These decreases were correlated with amount of marijuana used in the three months before VBM analysis. Most importantly, smaller gray matter volume was far more pronounced in young adults than in those over age 25; this is particularly relevant because the human brain is well known to be "not completely hard-wired" until about age 25.

Marijuana is associated with increased risk of psychotic disease, depression, anxiety and suicide. Despite rumors to the contrary, smoking pot increases risk of addiction and abuse. Short-term usage alters sensory perception, temporarily impairs memory and confuses thought-processing. Other problems include mood changes, rapid heartbeat, loss of libido and vomiting disorders. Even among seasoned users, there are dramatic dose-related decreases in reaction time, attention span, short-term memory and muscle coordination. Acute marijuana use is associated with twice the risk of injury or death by motor vehicle accident. Furthermore, smoking pot is the same as smoking unfiltered cigarettes – with its associated greater risks of heavy wrinkles, chronic cough, obstructive lung diseases and perhaps lung cancer (which might take 20 to 40 years to appear). These findings are supported by dozens of high-quality scientific studies.

In Colorado – where both medicinal and recreational marijuana are now legal – 2 percent of the state's population were registered for medical marijuana in 2012. However, 50 percent of physician-marijuana recommendations came from just 15 providers. When polled, only 20 percent of Colorado physicians felt there was a medical usefulness for marijuana.

Whereas it is unlikely for marijuana to be effective in "any chronic debilitating condition" for which it has been approved in Colorado, there is some evidence that marijuana can benefit certain medical disorders (e.g. improving appetite in late stages of cancer). At the present time, however, the risk/benefit ratio is alarming; risks of marijuana's serious side effects far outweigh benefits. Subsequently, the medical community seems largely hesitant to accept medical (or recreational) marijuana.

The same dose of a drug, for genetic reasons, can often cause vastly different responses in any two individuals. A child might, therefore, be convinced by someone that "marijuana is cool and has no unwanted side effects," and then be lulled into pot-smoking before realizing his brain has become permanently injured.

Although marijuana remains illegal for those under age 21, the drug's increased availability and growing public acceptance has undoubtedly caused many teenagers to experiment and abuse it. Marijuana under the age of 25 causes irreversible, permanent damage to brain cells and should be avoided. Period.

Daniel W. Nebert, MD, is professor emeritus at the Department of Pediatrics and Molecular & Developmental Biology, and Division of Genetics, at Cincinnati Children's Hospital. He lives in Wilsonville.

Andrew A. Monte, MD, is assistant professor at the Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, and sits on the Colorado Retail Marijuana Public Health Advisory Committee.