Florida leads the nation in sign-ups for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, despite the state's Republican leadership resisting the law at every turn.

That interest has not translated into huge numbers for Florida Health Choices, the state's rival insurance marketplace, even though it started selling full coverage plans last year as an alternative to the federal site. There is additional incentive this year for people to get insured because anyone who doesn't could face tax penalties.

The federal government reports that 1.6 million Floridians have signed up for plans or were automatically renewed for coverage they purchased last year on healthcare.gov. This includes 80,256 people in the Jacksonville area.

Most people who buy insurance through the federal exchange qualify for subsidies to help them afford coverage.

Florida Health Choices said it sold 42 comprehensive plans during the open enrollment period that ended Feb. 15. Add in a handful of other coverages sold, and it translates to about $144,000 worth of premiums for a website that the state has spent millions of dollars investing in over the years. Update: Florida Health Choices CEO Rose Naff said the initial number provided was incorrect and the correct amount of total premiums is $253,170.96.

Florida Health Choices was the brainchild of then House Speaker Marco Rubio, now a U.S. senator. He envisioned an "online marketplace" where small business owners could shop for insurance for their employees.

Two years later, President Barack Obama's health care legislation include health exchanges as a major component at the same time that lack of funding and political disagreements had slowed down the development of Florida Health Choices. With the federal government stealing much of its thunder, Florida's health exchange has struggled over the years to establish an identity.

The state exchange finally launched in 2014 with a focus on the hundreds of thousands of Floridians who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to receive subsidies on the federal exchange. Florida Health Choices was loaded up with low-cost and discount plans that were a far cry from full coverage.

Not many people made purchases; only 30 sales were recorded in the site's first six months.

In December, Florida Health Choices announced it would sell comprehensive health plans for people who wanted full coverage to avoid the tax penalties but either don't qualify for subsidies that would require them to use the federal exchange or didn't want to because of political reasons.

Now, the numbers show that all but a few Floridians shopping for health insurance are willing to embrace Obamacare. The Florida Health Choices board will again have to make some tough decisions on how to move forward. The Legislature has indicated in the past that it will not continue to allocate dollars to keep the site afloat.