Wolf Blitzer says White House should follow Republicans' suggestion and delay Obamacare for a year until website glitches are ironed out

CNN anchor says website issues show Obamacare is not ready for launch

Wolf Blitzer urged government to delay implementing ACA for a year

Since launch on October 1, Healthcare.gov has experienced problems

Thousands left unable to sign up for care plans due to site failings



Critique: Wolf Blitzer said government should delay Obamacare until website is fixed

Wolf Blitzer has hit out at the White House over the launch of Obamacare saying the health insurance marketplace is not ready for the programme.

The CNN anchor urged the government to listen to advice from the Republican party and hold off on the health insurance scheme until the website providing the care cover plans work properly.



Since the launch on October 1, the state website Healthcare.gov has experienced problems which has resulted in thousands left unable to sign up for affordable health cover.

‘If they weren’t fully ready, they should accept the advice that a lot of Republicans are giving them.

'Delay it another year, get it ready, and make sure it works,” Blitzer said on CNN yesterday.

‘They know how to do it, but if they didn’t get it ready on time, then maybe fix the problem and make sure people don’t have to worry about it,’ he added.

Despite efforts by thee Health and Human Service Department to fix HealthCare.gov and other associated websites glitches have frustrated millions of consumers unable to complete their applications.

The website problems gave Republicans reason to hit back at the Affordable Care Act, known better under the name given to it by the opposition – ‘Obamacare’.

'Americans have seen once again that Obamacare is not ready for prime time,' Rep. Eric Cantor of Virginia, the No. 2 House Republican, said in a statement on Friday.

'A dysfunctional website is the least of that law's problems,' he added.

The government made an attempt to turn the online issues into positive coverage, blaming the glitches on high demands.

'Americans are excited to look at their options for health coverage, with record demand in the first days of the marketplaces,' said the release announcing the planned fixes.

The statement was headlined: 'Health Insurance Marketplace Open for Business - Week One Success.'



Problems: Ms Hill says the 'terminate' button on the Health Insurance Marketplace did not work