Last week, I had the opportunity to visit the East New York Diagnostic and Treatment Center, a Community Health Center in Brooklyn, N.Y. This center is part of the New York City Health and Hospital Corporation.

The mission of this organization is to join with other health care providers and communities to extend quality health care equally to all New Yorkers so as to promote health, welfare and safety to all citizens. My purpose there was to visit the optometry program housed there and lead a site visit for the optometry residency program, sponsored by SUNY College of Optometry.

The five boroughs of New York City are like no other place in the U.S. that I have ever visited. According to recent census reports, there are almost 8.5 million people living in a land area of 305 square miles. Not only does New York City have the most population density in America, it is also one of the most culturally diverse, with more than 800 different spoken languages.

As such, the mission of the Health and Hospital Corporation (HHC) to provide quality health care to all New Yorkers is particularly challenging. For me, as a person interested in health care reform and, in particular, the role of optometry, this was an enlightening and interesting day.

I had the unique opportunity to have lunch with the medical director of the health center. This physician is a seasoned medical director in the health center environment, having been recognized by the National Committee for Quality Assurance with both the Physician Practice Connections Recognition Program and the Patient-Centered Medical Home Recognition Program every year since 2011. I asked him two pointed questions that lead to a very rewarding conversation.

The first question that I posed was about his thoughts on the Affordable Care Act (ACA). He reported that this law has had a very positive influence on the health center. There are more people coming to the center for routine and preventive care rather than just for urgent medical problems. There is also a marked increase in this patient population of having billable health care. Because of the mission of HHC, all patients are seen, regardless of their ability to pay. With the new law requiring everyone to have access to affordable care, many more patients have some form of health insurance.

Overall, he believes that the ACA has not been just beneficial to the health center, but to the community at large. The center has been able to change their culture from primarily the treatment and triage of urgent and emergent medical problems to an overall wellness program with an increased focus on health education and disease prevention.