Joe Albers stands behind of his creation made of gears. The former mechanic who live in Niwot puts a new spin on car parts and railroad track spikes by transforming them into what he calls "heavy metal" art. For more photos, go to www.timescall.com. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Over time, working for a living as a mechanic cost Joe Albers too much.

"I used to take 20 Tylenol during the day and then get drunk as a skunk at night. The pain was horrific," he said. "Sometimes I could only crawl. I would sleep on ice packs. I got very ornery. But I was as strong as an ox. That's what helped me work for so long."

Albers started repairing bikes out of his parents' garage at 10; built his own golf caddy at 14; and shortly thereafter began cleaning and greasing the big rigs used to haul cattle in his hometown of Rochelle, Ill. That grunt job led to invaluable hands-on learning experience about everything under the hood of a truck and how to repair parts with an arc welder, portable mig, acetylene and cutting torches, metal chop saw, and hand grinders.

Joe Albers begins to weld a metal flower made out of transmission gears. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

His mechanical inclination as a teenager ultimately landed him a plum job just out of high school as a mechanic for the Caterpillar dealership in Rockford, the second largest city in the state behind Chicago. When he moved in 1999 to Colorado, he landed better mechanic jobs in Denver as a mechanic for the Miller Beer distributor and, later, the Anheiser Bush distributor.

But by 2009, the painful, degenerative condition that started dogging him at 15 in his back — ankylosing spondylitis, an immune disease that causes a type of spinal arthritis with swelling between the vertebrae that can lead to vertabrae fusion — finally forced him to quit his job and go on permanent medical disability at age 41.

Transferring his practical mechanical skills into fanciful metal hobby art two years later changed the Niwot resident's life again, this time for the better.

Artist in the making

Ultimately, Albers, now 46, needed to get back to using his hands somehow. Letting them sit idle for about two years depressed him as much as sharing custody of his kids after his divorce, he said.

To see the beauty underneath the mottled surface of his life, he unwittingly made his first artistic leap there by dumping a bucket of rusty railroad spikes on his gravel driveway and shaping them into flower petals.

"After they had laid out there like that for about a month, I thought, 'Well, I should weld them together,'" Albers said. "... And when I did that, my senses went back to being a mechanic, back to the smell of welding and the smell of grease. The cutting and the sparks."

Now he uses all sorts of scrapped parts from the engines he once worked over or under every day — internal transmission parts, clutch housings, rotors, steel rods, fan motor covers, torque converter parts, you-name-it.

Though Albers can only create "here and there" due to his back pain, he calls his newfound hobby job as an artist something else.

He calls it his "brain therapy."

"People think you're nuts. They think you're crazy because one day you're baling hay, and the next day you're hobbling around," he said, referring to field work he did in his youth as an otherwise strong young man. "...I grew up workin', and now I'm not. It bothers me. ... Making art here and there gives me peace and some busyness. It fills in the absence of the kids when they are not here. ... It helps me be about productivity instead of negativity."

Exhibits around town

Joe Albers begins to weld a metal flower made out of transmission gears. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Residents at The Peaks Care Center/Frontier Therapy Center at 1440 Coffman St. in Longmont do not know that a mechanic designed and built the four pieces of art standing in the outdoor courtyard though they be made from old metal parts -- a lime green and pink flower made of spikes, a turtle formed from a clutch; and a windmill worked up from other scrap parts.

They just know their common area looks more funky, more fun, than it did before, care center activities assistant, Anita Rose, said.

"Joe's windmill is my favorite," she said.

"When the wind blows, it doesn't move. People perceive this in different ways. So, it's a conversation piece, and that goes over well with the elderly and their families."

Albers donated the art last year after spending time with his kids at the center visiting residents.

But he sells some art, too, at places in Niwot such as Niwot Market, 7980 Niwot Road; Powder Keg Brewing Company, 101 Second Ave.; and at the Niwot Art Walk from 6 p.m. to 9 p.m. on the first Friday of every month at the Emporium building, 136 Second Ave.

Fun and Funky Art Gallery and Gifts on 10 Old Stagecoach Road in Bailey next to the Coney Island Hot Dog stand also stocks some of his art.

Bert Steele, Niwot Market's owner, met Albers when he came into the store as a customer.

"I bought five or six pieces from Joe later because it brings color here. And the flowers of his that we put out front don't need water. They don't dry up and die," he said.

Steele features about a dozen other pieces of art inside the store made by Albers.

"The people who like it will buy several," he added.

Albers on some level can't believe it.

"Change is hard. The unfamiliar. The disappointments. The what ifs. The what-could-have-beens, huh?" he said. "... And I am unfamiliar with artist's terms. May be I didn't like artists before. May be I didn't know any artists before."

But do you call yourself an artist now, Joe?

"Some days," he said. "I know that this all came from that first little flower that I threw on the ground."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@msn.com or at 303-746-0942.