STILWELL, Okla. -- In any armed conflict when the hostilities start there are always many targets that each side can fire upon. The victor is the one who can identify his enemy’s most vulnerable target and destroy it. If one side has a bunch of generals that are only focused on being the head general instead of winning the war, more than likely because of their squabbling they will come out on the short end of the stick. The squabbling that is going on between the Republican presidential candidates is starting to get a little old, and if they fail to win the White House next year it will be us average Americans who will pay the price.

Whether you support front-runner Donald Trump or not we all have to admit that he has brought important issues to the forefront. At least he has been forceful about the problems we are facing as a nation and offered his solutions to them. I have noticed that many of the Republican super pacs and other candidates are solely focused on trying to destroy his character and reputation. Most of the stuff they are coming up with is sound bites that have been pieced together out of context. Instead of playing hard ball politics against one of their fellow Republicans maybe they should start looking at the target rich environment of the liberal progressive crowd.

One of the liberals’ crowning achievements is the Affordable Care Act. Just a few days ago one of the biggest health care insurance companies said it is getting out of the exchanges because it is a losing proposition for them. It seems that no one wants to talk about the 2 million Americans that have had their healthcare plans dropped so far, or the Manhattan Institute’s analysis showing that health insurance premiums will rise dramatically — by as much as 99 percent and as much as 62 percent — with some groups rising by as much as 30 percent. Dctibles are skyrocketing — running as high as $6,350 for a single person and $12,700 per family for some policies. According to the Congressional Budget Office just as many Americans will lack health coverage in 10 years as before the law was passed — even as two million fewer will be working than if the law hadn’t passed, all at the same time costing the American people $1.798 trillion dollars.

I wonder if the Republican leadership has forgotten the results of the last election. While they were busy destroying each other the liberals were sitting on the sidelines watching the self-destruction. Because of their backbiting and desire to be on top of the hill they allowed a totally incompetent president to be re-elected. Obamacare is just one issue; we haven’t even touched the increases of food stamps, welfare, etc. In 1970, there were 4,340,000 — or roughly 1 in every 50 — Americans on food stamps. In 2013, the U.S. Department of Agriculture reported a record 46,535,904 — or 1 in every 6.9 — Americans on food stamps.

I have a suggestion to all of the so-called conservatives that have no campaign issue besides destroying Trump. If all you have is childish attack ads and cannot articulate a logical, non-emotional solution to our problems, Trump needs to win. Decide who the enemy is and stop eating your own.