More bad news for President Obama: According to a Harris Poll behalf of Express Employment Professionals (EEP), nearly half of unemployed Americans have “completely given up” looking for work.

The poll confirms what millions of Americans are experiencing under five years of President Obama’s big government policies:

Bob Funk, CEO of EEP, said, “When I see that 47 percent of unemployed Americans agree that they have given up on looking for work, I’m shocked because that suggests the economy is much worse than many people realize. Our economy isn’t recovering fast enough if our fellow Americans have lost confidence in the job market.”

As reported by National Review earlier this month:

In April, the U.S. economy added 288,000 jobs, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ latest numbers, which easily beats expectations of around 215,000 hires. The unemployment rate dropped to an encouraging 6.3 percent, but not because of that impressive headline number. Rather, the labor-force-participation dropped 0.4 percentage points, to 62.8 percent. After a few months when it appeared to be holding steady or rising, it’s now dropped back to the lowest level since 1978. Why? It could be the incipient effects of Obamacare reducing “job lock,” or it could be the expiration of unemployment benefits, or it could just generally be frustration with the labor market, especially among the long-term unemployed. The statistic used to calculate the unemployment rate, in fact, the “household survey” that polls people as to whether they’re employed (rather than asking employers whether they’ve hired anyone), saw the number of jobs in the economy drop by 73,000 jobs, though this number by itself isn’t considered all that reliable.

Though unemployment fell by 0.4% to 6.3% in April, it’s clear that millions of Americans see their economic outlook as very bleak.

There is a silver lining in this report, however. Ninety-one percent (91%) of those surveyed said, “I’m hopeful that I will find a job I really want in the next six months.” Outlook is key. Americans who give up looking for work and have no hope are doomed to become victims of long-term unemployment.

Harris surveyed 1,500 Americans who are unemployed but capable of working.