Sioux Falls, SD

Life offers its share of surprises, but here in KELOLAND, one thing you can count on - cold weather. Heating your home is a big priority this time of year for many families, but that can also bring financial complications.

"During the holiday and Christmas season, especially during the winter season, our heating bills tend to go up. So, we really focus on finding people who, during the winter, struggle with that one-time heating increase," Dane Bloch with The Community Outreach said.

Dane Bloch works with The Community Outreach. This time each year, its focus turns to making sure families in the area are staying ahead of any bills that may slip through the cracks. That's the case for Sherrol Daggett. She and her sister never had any problems paying their heating bill, until this year.

"The hospital bills, the medical bills were just kind of right there and I couldn't keep up with it," Daggett said. "They wanted their money right away, and I just didn't have it, so what I had I gave to them."

Hundreds of dollars in medical bills forced Daggett to make a choice. Between the hospital bills, rent, transportation and food, the heating bill was left behind.

"I did have a disconnection notice. The utilities are usually pretty good about helping and working with you, but I just didn't qualify at that time," Daggett said.

Daggett knew that she needed help, and fast.

"I had gone down to the County, and they said that I didn't qualify, but they sent me to Community Outreach, and they were more than willing to help," Daggett said.

It was still a tough decision to ask for assistance.

"You just kind of had to swallow your pride, but you also have to turn around and think you're not the only one in this boat," Daggett said.

"There's always a need, especially this time of the year. During this time, we do see utility assistance actually grow, but the cool thing about Sioux Falls is that there are programs out there to help," Bloch said.

Daggett soon found out the process was simple. It's an interview that includes reviewing pay stubs and proving what's causing applicants to fall behind.

"It's not just a five-minute appointment to see what's going on. We actually sit down with them for about 45 minutes to really go through their situation, to make sure they're comfortable letting them know that we're here to help," Bloch said.

It's not a hand out, but a temporary hand up. The Community Outreach helps out with utility bills to the average of $150 per family.

"We make it one of our principles to not pay the entire bill, we don't want to take out someone's full responsibility. We're here as a gap assistance for the increase," Bloch said.

Without that help, Daggett and her sister may have found themselves in a tough spot.

"Probably without electricity, until I could get it paid. I would just have to struggle through," Daggett said.

Against their typical process, Daggett's $175 heating bill was paid in full, and she is on track to be able to pay her next bill.

"It's looking up. That helped me. I had the opportunity to get things back in order and it's always a struggle, but that's just part of life anymore," Daggett said.

"What we revolve around here at the Outreach is stability, so if we can keep a family in housing, if we can keep them warm, that really helps us feel that we're helping keep them stable," Bloch said.

That's exactly where Daggett wants to be.

"I'm back on track now, and we're going to make it," Daggett said.

If you are in need of help during the winter months with utility bills or need assistance setting up a payment plan that works best for you, visit The Community Outreach website.