In Colorado, homeless students are nearly twice as likely to graduate from high school as children in the foster care system.

That startling statistic is the crux of our Sunday story that examines the academic hurdles facing foster-care kids and Colorado’s efforts to turn that around.

Here, we hear more from four impressive young people who overcame those odds and have bright futures.

Rayvon Spencer, 22, now studying at the Community College of Denver

At 2 years old, Rayvon was taken from his parents and put into the foster care system. He was adopted at 5 but things only got worse under the influence of drug-addicted parents who fought daily, he said. He and his adopted brothers were kept in a basement. His sisters lived upstairs. He ran away at 17 and eventually earned a GED.

On isolation as a foster care child:

“A person’s mind isn’t there, especially coming out of foster care, because no one is there to be there for them through the thick and thin. No one is there through life, teaching what being mature is.”



On the ideal setting for foster children:

“Each foster child should have one specific home, for one specific child, so that way, you don’t have an adult focused on so many different things, so many different kids. One or two or three (children), not a group of people. That makes it so much easier for that foster parent and for those kids to get to where they want to get.”





Latisha Alvarado Barrington, 21, studying at CU Denver

When Latisha was 8, her parents left her and her siblings home alone. Her baby brother was crying and wouldn’t stop. The children found a nipple, filled a Gatorade bottle with formula and fed him. Then, a firm knock on the door. Two Denver police officers. Latisha said she was the babysitter. “How old are you?” they asked. She said 13. So began a journey through the foster care system that took her to a dozen placements in a few short years.

On how her biological parents influenced her schooling and her experience in a crisis center:

“It was easier for us not to go (to school) because my parents wouldn’t fight us on it. It was just, ‘Whatever, do whatever you want.’ So when we were taken away from our parents’ home, I stayed in a crisis center for six months and wasn’t in school. I did their worksheets but it was more third grade work than sixth grade. It was boring.”



On all the moving around as a foster care child:

“I hated it. Hated going into a new school. Even when moving from school to school in foster care. I didn’t have any friends. My clothes were big. My hair was a bit messy. I was sort of the poor kid. If it wasn’t for my vibrant personality, of wanting to talk to people, to get involved, I think I would have gone under the radar.”

On training foster parents:

“Kids in foster care are extremely traumatized, extremely abused, extremely neglected and misunderstood, and all these things add up. All these things are not the fault of our own but the fault of their parents. We are like the consequences of their actions. So training parents to be trauma-informed, training parents on how to recognize that behavior. It isn’t because the child is a jerk. It isn’t because the child doesn’t want to listen. It’s because the child is severely messed up in one way or another. So it’s about creating this awareness so compassion can be brought in a little bit stronger.”



Emily Samora, 26, living in Westminster with her 3-year-old daughter, beginning internship in program helping foster care youth

Emily was 4 when she was taken from her drug-addicted mother and placed in foster care. Her rocky road included being expelled from school on a drug charge and graduation from an all-girls school that also serves as a residential treatment home.

On the instability of being a foster care kid:

“One of the biggest struggles in my journey was it was really choppy, getting transferred from place to place to place, trying to go from one subject to another subject and not knowing what they are teaching you. You could go from pre-algebra in one school and you go to another school and they’ll be on something like advanced algebra.”



On what needs to happen to help foster care youth with school:

“You need to know where they’re at in school. You just can’t assume you can take a child from this class and stick them in this class and assume they’re being taught the same material. It’s always going to be different, it’s always going to be switched up. So if you had all the school districts comply to have the same subjects taught at the same (time) so the kids can stay where they’re at in transition, that’s a big, big thing.”





Alisiana Medina, 20, student at Community College of Denver with plans to become a paralegal and eventually a lawyer.

Alisiana’s mother died when she was 7. She was placed in the foster system after her father failed to enroll her and another sibling in school and was declared an unfit parent.

On arriving at yet another new school:

“When you come into a new school environment, it’s always uncomfortable. It’s always unsettling. Make them feel comfortable. Make them feel at home. Don’t make them feel different. They’re not different. They’re just troubled. Everyone is troubled in one way or another.”



On what needs to happen to help foster care youth with school:

“Every middle school, high school, they all have different math classes and have different subjects being taught at different times. Putting (foster care youth) in the right class is key.”