We'll have to live without Chad Henderson's tweets for the time being. Once again, Henderson, as he did in 2013, has taken his Twitter account private, limiting it to "confirmed followers." This time he likely did so in reaction to a NewsBusters post earlier this afternoon by P.J. Gladnick.

Henderson first gained notoriety during the initial Obamacare sign-up process in late 2013 when he claimed to have "enrolled" himself and his father when virtually no one else could even access the HealthCare.gov web site. The press unskeptically lapped up the Organizing for Action volunteer's story until Reason.com's Peter Suderman shredded it. It turned out that Henderson had only set up a profile for himself and had not purchased any health care plan. Henderson resurfaced on Twitter after the Paris terrorist attacks yesterday, asking: "Do Trump, Rubio, and Carson have the experience and knowledge to prevent and react to a similar Paris attack? Not at all, folks."

It seems not to have occurred to Henderson that his hero President Barack Obama didn't prevent the current Paris attacks (though he is of course not the person primarily responsible for doing so), and that Obama's reaction failed to recognize the obvious Islamic motivations of the terrorists who carried them out — something the three men Henderson apparently despises have not hesitated to observe.

As Gladnick observed this afternoon: "Although Henderson tries to present an image of himself as a laid back dude, his dark side slipped through bigtime. However, this isn't the first time we got to see his dark side." In April 2013, Henderson reacted to a tweet by 2008 GOP vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin by suggesting that she "go suck on a turd." Charming.

Oh, there's more. You see, even though Henderson has just taken his Twitter account private, we are oh so fortunate that Googling his Twitter handle reveals yet another misguided — yet likely popular on the left — take on the Paris terrorist attacks:

Using "not all" in such an argument is classic deceptive misdirection; after all, one only has to find a single good German, Christian and Muslim to make it true. But doing so proves nothing.

In the real world, Henderson's tweet is useless:

Enough Germans supported and/or acquiesced to Hitler to enable one of the most murderous regimes in human history to come perilously close to achieving world domination. The world had no choice but to treat all of Germany as the enemy in order to defeat it.

There was never, ever a time when anything resembling a large plurality, let alone a majority, of genuine Christians supported the KKK, and no one can genuinely point to Biblical support for what the KKK did. In fact Catholics, the original Christians, were on the KKK's target list, right there with Jews, blacks and Southern European immigrants. Christian groups routinely denounced the KKK when it was strong, and people who were Christians in their private lives contributed mightily to effectively shutting it down, to the point where even the ultra-paranoid Southern Poverty Law Center now admits that it only has perhaps 5,000 - 8,000 members splintered among dozens of different organizations.

Sadly, ISIS bases what it does on the "convert, submit, or die" interpretation of the Qur'an widely shared by Muslims worldwide. ISIS and Islamic fundamentalists in general are just in a far bigger hurry to carry out the Qur'an's directives. The argument that a disproportionately large percentage of Muslims is indeed evil is supported by the fact that, at last count, Islamic terrorists have carried out over 27,000 deadly terrorist attacks worldwide since the World Trade Center and Pentagon attacks in the U.S. on on September 11, 2001. That's just under 2,000 per year, and over five per day.

Never forget that Chad Henderson was an establishment press darling two years ago until New Media exposed his untruthfulness. He might be a borderline celebrity today if it weren't for New Media. Now we also know that he's a hyperpartisan who refuses to recognize the reality of the unbridled evil the civilized world faces.

Cross-posted at BizzyBlog.com.