Dr. Ann DeClue, an internist who has a special interest in women’s heart health, has opened a practice in Lebanon. CONTRIBUTED

By Virginia Burroughs

Contributing Writer

In the small Missouri town where Dr. Ann DeClue grew up, there were no female doctors; she thought that must be a “man’s job,” but liked the sciences so became a medical technologist.

“I had worked in Boston several years, and was visiting my sister in Chicago,” recalls DeClue. “When I complained about being bored with my job, she asked what I really wanted to do, and I said ‘go to medical school’ — that’s the first time I ever thought about it as something I could do.

“It took me a while after that to picture myself as a doctor, but eventually I looked into it, had to take a few courses and then my entrance exam.”

She was accepted at Chicago’s Northwestern Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago, where she graduated, completing her residency at Mercy Hospital Medical Center in Chicago.

“I was 29 when I started medical school, and when I got out, I had my own practice in the Chicago area from 1998-2006. That was a time of lots of hospital mergers and HMO’s.”

When her husband was transferred to Maryland, she worked for a year at a VA outpatient clinic in West Virginia, then went back into the private sector.

Her husband found a new position in the Warren County area last November, and the couple moved to Springboro. “I spent time getting to know the area, applied for an Ohio medical license, and started looking at health care systems,” she said.

“I was drawn to the Premier Health Network because I liked their values and the people I met. There was a space available in Lebanon, so I started a practice there. I’d joined the Lebanon Chamber of Commerce, and they had a ribbon cutting for me, which was very nice.”

DeClue practices general internal medicine, but a special interest is women’s heart health. “In Chicago, I worked on the Go Red for Women Campaign, a preventive initiative of the American Heart Association, and had worked in a program to identify risk factors in younger women.

“I’m excited about this being an age of prevention and taking a more holistic approach to health care, in part because of the Affordable Care Act. I think we’re moving towards something good that will help many people.”

DeClue’s practice, located at 990 Belvedere Dr. Suite A in Lebanon, is accepting new patients. The office number is 513-228-0700.