BOCA RATON, Fla., July 8, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Health insurance costs are creating struggles for millions of business owners, families, and individuals today. Within many companies, from small to large, the cost of supplying employees health insurance coverage has become so expensive between 80% - 90% of businesses are expected to eliminate their group health plans over the next eight years.

Business owners always ask Frank Saltzburg, an expert in group health insurance, "How can I lower my health insurance costs yet still help my employees obtain first-rate health coverage?"

"There are several strategies that will allow millions of business owners and families to acquire excellent, affordable health coverage. Unfortunately, unless the business owner does their homework with a state-licensed insurance professional holding a Certified Health Care Reform Specialist designation, they will be unaware of these simple solutions for their businesses and families," said Saltzburg, a partner with Healthcare Solutions Team, LLC (www.ushcre.com) which helps businesses lower their health care premiums and provide the most comprehensive health plans.

He offers four secrets of obtaining the best affordable health coverage:

Always use a professional, state-licensed broker or agent who is certified as a health care reform specialist. They are trained and educated to be aware of the best plans in the ever-changing current market, both in the private and public exchanges. It does not cost you any more to use a broker as major medical rates are already approved by your State Insurance Commissioner. Don't use a public online quote engine as your final answer. It is only a starting point and is susceptible to data breaches leading to identity theft. Be aware of "public exchange" call center navigators who do not hold a state-issued health insurance license. Utilize the "bundle" concept to give you better coverage at a more affordable price with less out-of-pocket financial exposure.

"To further add to the confusion and frustration for businesses and families looking for affordable health care, there has been a new influx of online insurance quote engines through the public insurance exchanges. The problem here is these public exchange quote engines will list 'bargain health plans' that typically have the smallest network of doctors and hospitals. Many people are shocked to learn their plan's network is limited to one county within their state and their doctors are not part of these networks. A recent Associated Press survey found that most cancer hospitals do not accept Obamacare," he stated.

"One other major challenge to getting the best medical insurance coverage is the increase in 'public exchange call center navigators' that, in most cases, are not state-licensed to represent Major Medical coverage. In addition, the majority of these call center exchange navigators are not even government-certified as health care reform specialists in the Affordable Care Act," Saltzburg said.

One big, ongoing concern is the average deductible today is estimated at $5,000. "However, what everyone should really be looking at is the out-of-pocket maximum per calendar year. This is the true financial exposure we all experience," Saltzburg indicated.

"We design our plans strategically so that the deductible and the maximum out-of-pocket exposure are no longer a major issue. According to industry analysts, about 80% of hospitalizations occur due to accidents. Up to 18% of hospitalizations happen due to critical illnesses such as heart attacks, cancer, stroke, kidney failure, severe burns, loss of limbs, blindness, deafness, and coma," he stated.

"We 'bundle' our plans to include accidental coverage to pay up to the deductible amount and cover out-of-pocket expenses. Plus, we offer critical illness coverage to also offset the deductible and any out-of-pocket expenses. The critical illness coverage offers the ability to have a lump sum payout allowing the insured to have an extra $5,000 - $200,000 of living expense money. While people are recuperating from their critical illness, they won't worry about paying daily living bills. Bundling allows the insured to have a more comprehensive plan with true peace of mind," he said.

About Frank Saltzburg

With more than 20 years of health benefits, health care reform, and financial services experience, Frank helps clients obtain the health care coverage that best solves their needs. His expertise includes designing affordable health care plans for business owners, families, and individuals. He is a partner with Healthcare Solutions Team, LLC and is licensed in Arizona, Florida, Pennsylvania, Oregon, Washington, Georgia, Texas, California, Alabama and Nevada. He is also a Certified Health Care Reform Specialist (CHCRS) and speaker on the current Health Care Reform Act as it relates to businesses, families and individuals.

For information, go to http://www.ushcre.com.

SOURCE Frank Saltzburg

Related Links

http://www.ushcre.com