Class of 2015's college scholarships total $873K

Newly minted Fort Morgan High School graduates throw their caps in the air Saturday in celebration of their big accomplishment. Due to rainy weather forecasts and the very soggy and muddy Legion Field, the 2015 commencement ceremony was held indoors at the FMHS gymnasium. ( Heldwin Brito / Special to the Times )

Sarena Wells and Juan Lomeli Loera, the 2014-15 Fort Morgan High School Student Senate representatives, greet their fellow soon-to-be-graduates and all of the family members and friends gathered in the FMHS gymnasium for the 2015 graduation ceremony. Seated behind them is commencement speaker the Rev. Kelly Cupples of Life Fellowship Church. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

Over the last four years, the class of 2015 had many moments when they wondered if they would make it through high school and reach graduation, according to Co-Salutatorians Ashley Lauck and Lia Shaver.

"I'm looking at 171 people who made it! How does that feel?" they asked their classmates Saturday in their speech at graduation.

In his speech, Valedictorian Joseph Smits explained that he thinks his class was perfect because of how adaptable they had been over the years.

As evidence, he pointed out, "This is the first time in 30 years we've had to move graduation indoors."

That was only one of many obstacles — hopefully the last one — the class of 2015 had to overcome, he said.

Fort Morgan High School Class of 2015 Valedictorian Joseph Smits told his class they had overcome many obstacles to reach graduation on Saturday, May 23, 2015. "Now, all I see is success, potential and the best years of our lives in front of us," Smits said. "I'm proud of all we've accomplished, and how we've grown into the perfect class." (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

"Now, all I see is success, potential and the best years of our lives in front of us," Smits said. "I'm proud of all we've accomplished, and how we've grown into the perfect class."

Fort Morgan High School Principal Ben announced that the class of 2015 had amassed more than $873,000 in scholarships for the coming year.

Commencement speaker the Rev. Kelly Cupples of Life Fellowship Church in Fort Morgan quoted Ernest Hemingway: "True nobility is being superior to your former self," telling the graduates to "feed your soul" in whatever ways made sense to their lives.

And, putting the emphasis on the last syllable of each word, Cupples urged the class to "stay mobile, agile, hostile and remember that you're fragile."

Advertisement

Afterward, Cupples said he felt "very honored" to have been asked to be the commencement speaker.

"It was just a lot of fun," he said.

Also part of the fun was the Fort Morgan High School Jazz Band's performance of Journey's "Don't Stop Believin'" and the Morgan High Singers' rendition of Five for Fighting's "100 Years."

For Bauman, seeing this class graduate was special but also a bit bittersweet.

Lia Shaver receives her diploma and shakes hands with Morgan County Re-3 School District Superintendent Ron Echols at Fort Morgan High School graduation Saturday in the FMHS gymnasium. Shaver was a co-salutatorian, along with Ashley Lauck, who is next in line to receive a diploma. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

"This is always the top of my year, seeing all of their accomplishments," the principal said after the streamlined, one-hour-long graduation ceremony was finished.

Getting a bit emotional, he pointed to a special connection he had with this class.

"I've been following them since Baker (Central School)," he said. "This is my last group. They're a special group."

It also was an emotional time for the graduates and their families and friends, as evidenced by a lots of tear-filled faces, yells of congratulations as names were read and they walked across the front, receiving their diploma from Superintendent Ron Echols and shaking hands with Board of Education President Rogelio Segura and Bauman.

And after the names were all read, tassels moved to the other side of the mortar boards, and the caps flung in the air, it was time for the 171 FMHS graduates to head out, first to parties and then into the world.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs