3K/5K benefit walk set Sunday in Fort Collins

Janie Wingfield, of Loveland, hugs her son, Jake, sometime before she was diagnosed with atypical diffuse systemic sclerosis. ( Special to the Reporter-Herald / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Janie Wingfield of Loveland started having pain in her knees and joints; and then her ankles swelled up.

She thought it was inactivity from a surgery she had just had on her neck and kept going back to the doctor.

Her family physician referred her to a rheumatologist because he thought she might have an autoimmune disease.

Finally in January 2013, she was diagnosed with a type of scleroderma called "atypical diffuse systemic sclerosis."

Wingfield spent over a year first in denial, and then coming to terms with the diagnosis.

She is helping to organize the fourth annual "Stepping Out to Cure Scleroderma" 3K/5K walk on Sunday, Sept. 14 at Fort Collins City Park to bring education and awareness to Northern Colorado about the disease, as well as help raise money for research.

If you go What: Stepping Out to Cure Scleroderma 3K/5K Walk. When: Sunday, Sept. 14. Registration starts at 10 a.m.; the Kids' Fun Run is at 10:30 a.m., the 3K/5K walk begins at 11 a.m. and the awards ceremony and live and silent auction is at 12:30 p.m. Where: Fort Collins City Park, 1500 W. Mulberry St., Fort Collins. Cost: $35 for adult walkers, which includes a free T-shirt. Children under 12 are free. More info: Register online at scleroderma.org/steppingoutftcollins. The event includes a "kids' fun run," live music by Cabin of Love and a live auction with auctioneer Brian Bean of Bean and Bean Auctions and post-walk lunch catered by Dorothy's catering. Advertisement

The event will include a kids' fun run, live music by Cabin of Love and a live auction with auctioneer Brian Bean of Bean and Bean Auctions, pre-walk warm up and stretches by Gold's Gym of Loveland and Jazzercise of Fort Collins, and post-walk lunch catered by Dorothy's Catering. Register online at scleroderma.org/steppingoutftcollins.

"Autoimmune diseases all have something in common by the way the attack happens. The cells mutate and start attacking their own tissue," Wingfield said.

In her case, her cells attack her skin, which produces extra collagen and forms clumps of hardening skin. She has collagen bands of tightening flesh all over her body.

"It's not only unsightly and makes me self-conscious, but it's also painful," she said.

She hasn't worked since 2011 because her legs and feet used to go numb when she stood for long periods of time.

"I've been through neck and back fusions and broken bones (before the diagnosis), but this disease, it fatigues you. You're swollen, you hurt, you feel blue," Wingfield said.

She has gone through several treatments with medication and even chemotherapy. It hasn't helped much with the hardening tissue. She said the disease will eventually affect her internal organs, and could cause tissue on her lungs and heart to start hardening. When that happens, she might be a candidate for a stem cell transplant where specialists would use her stem cells in a treatment that would possibly "reset her immune system" as she put it.

Wingfield went to a national convention this summer about the disease and met people whose fingers and hands had been amputated because the blood vessels had shut down around the fingers.

"It's an awful, horrible disease," she said. "I'm also in therapy because the emotional side of it knocked me off my foundation. I have so much anger."

She has a 12-year-old son so she tries to be positive for him. She is learning to eat more organically and living in the moment.

"But I'm angry because this will cheat me out of some of my life," she said.

By joining the Scleroderma Foundation, based in Denver, she found camaraderie, acceptance and people to help her along the path. She found that she didn't need to suffer silently without support.

To support the research into scleroderma, visit scleroderma.org/steppingoutftcollins and do a search for "Janie Wingfield" to donate in her name.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/jessicabenes.