Another debate, another repeal and replace pledge

With help from Paul Demko and Jennifer Haberkorn

CANDIDATES CALL (AGAIN) TO REPEAL OBAMACARE — Thursday's debate was light on health care, heavy on ISIS, although Sen. Marco Rubio and businessman Donald Trump directly said they would repeal the health law, and Sen. Ted Cruz implied he would do the same.

Story Continued Below

Trump also deployed a familiar talking point: That America's health care system is a mess — or as he put it, "Our health care is a horror show."

FACT-CHECKING THE CANDIDATES — Pro's Paul Demko breaks down the two biggest health care claims from last night.

— Despite Rubio's "certification," Obamacare hasn't killed jobs. Rubio referred to Obamacare as “a certified job killer.” There’s no evidence to support this frequent GOP assertion. Private sector job growth has climbed every month since passage of the Affordable Care Act. Two recent studies published in Health Affairs (here and here) found no evidence that companies are cutting jobs or reducing hours to avoid paying for health care coverage under the employer mandate.

— Trump's musings on mental health. "We have a huge mental health problem in this country,” Donald Trump said in a response to a question about gun control. “We're closing hospitals, we're closing wards. We're closing so many, because the states want to save money.” Trump’s rhetorical mishmash is somewhat difficult to untangle. While the number of hospitals has remained relatively stable in recent years, states did trim $4.35 billion from their mental health services during the recession, the National Association on Mental Illness reports, and they haven't fully made up the shortfall.

HOW TO ATTACK OBAMACARE — The attack lines we heard were the ones that candidates have trotted out before, but if Republicans wanted to really go after the health law, they could target real vulnerabilities. Here are five that come to mind.

— The co-ops. Twelve of the 23 co-ops created by the ACA have shut down, and nearly all of them are in financial trouble. The Senate Finance Committee just announced a hearing on Jan. 21 to scrutinize what went wrong.

— The mergers. It's not just the small health insurers that are struggling. Big insurance companies (and hospitals) are merging to survive, too, partly because Obamacare created incentives for big health companies to get bigger. And economists warn that that patients almost never win when plans and providers gain even more market power to raise their rates.

— The pilot programs. We don't hear a lot of political fury over this, but the Affordable Care Act funded tens of billions of dollars to test out health reform pilots like accountable care organizations. Five years later, the evidence that such programs are making health care better is inconclusive or downright disappointing.

— Premium spikes. The cost of ACA marketplace plans noticeably rose for many customers this year, with the cost of silver plans going up by an average of more than 11 percent this year, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation reports. Some states — like Oklahoma, Oregon, Alaska, and Montana — are seeing at least 25 percent jumps in the average price of the second lowest-cost silver plans.

— Remind most voters: Obamacare's coverage expansion isn't about you. While 9 million Americans gained insurance after the exchanges launched, that number pales next to the 175 million Americans who got covered through an employer last year. To put it more bluntly, most Americans aren't being directly insured by Obamacare plans. And the ones who did get ACA-related insurance tend to be poorer, older, or sicker … and don't necessarily vote in Republican primaries.

WELCOME TO FRIDAY — Alan Rickman's sad passing led to my first — collegial — dispute with Dan Goldberg, who writes the terrific POLITICO New York Care newsletter. I maintained that Rickman played the defining movie villain of both the 1980s (the quietly menacing Hans Gruber) and the 2000s (the deeply complex Severus Snape). The other Dan argued that Anthony Hopkins' Hannibal Lecter and Heath Ledger’s Joker were superior villains.

So who's the best movie bad guy of the past 25 years? Let me know at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter. And keep in mind: You're a hero if you agree with me.

PROGRAMMING NOTE: Pulse will take a break for Martin Luther King Jr. Day on Monday. We’ll be back Tuesday.

OOPS: CLINTON ATTACK ON SANDERS HEALTH PLAN BACKFIRES — "Hillary Clinton’s assault on Bernie Sanders for his support of a single-payer health system has stunned and irritated liberals who see it as an abandonment of core progressive principles," Pro's Nancy Cook writes. And it's doubly surprising because Clinton was so upset when Barack Obama attacked her back in 2008, over her own liberal health plan. "Since when do Democrats attack one another on universal health care?” Clinton said at the time. Read the full story.

THIS MIGHT MAKE DEAN SUPPORTERS WANT TO SCREAM — Howard Dean spent years loudly praising the idea of single-payer. Curiously, the one-time presidential candidate and former Vermont governor has changed his tune: He now opposes fellow Vermonter Bernie Sanders' single-payer plan. What changed? Dean now works for a health care lobbying firm, The Intercept points out.

OBAMA’S FAVORITE MEMORY: PASSING OBAMACARE — During a Twitter chat on Thursday, the president said that "the night aca passed; standing on truman balcony with all staff [who'd] made it happen, knowing we'd helped millions" was the top moment of his presidency. (He also used the chat to tout Louisiana's Medicaid expansion and discuss the toll of gun violence.)

It's a logical choice: The health law is probably the president's signature accomplishment. But that was more than 2,100 days ago, on March 21, 2010 — a telling reminder of how Obama's ambitious and successful early agenda has run into legislative and political blocks ever since.

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/1UzbZPw. **

FIRST IN PULSE: ALTARUM INSTITUTE’S ECONOMIC INDICATORS — According to the monthly numbers, national health spending in November 2015 was up 5 percent compared to November 2014, which represents a slowdown from a peak of nearly 7 percent growth in February 2015.

Meanwhile, the health care industry added 475,000 jobs in 2015, a 50 percent surge compared to 2014. The biggest factor? Hospitals, which represented about one-third of new health jobs last year, although Altarum notes that the hospital hiring boom appears to be slowing.

Folks who've followed my work will know — the jobs report is one of my favorite indicators to track. Why? Lawmakers constantly beat the drum about reining in health care costs, and labor is an enormous component of the sector's spending. Given the surge in health care hiring last year, it's tough to conclude that the cost curve is bending the right way.

ON TAP TODAY: Joe Biden visits the University of Pennsylvania's cancer center and takes part in a public roundtable late this afternoon. Expect to hear more details about the White House's "moon shot" cancer program.

NQF NAMES DARLING AS INTERIM CEO — Helen Darling will serve as the National Quality Forum's interim leader, stepping into the shoes of Christine Cassel. Darling's the former president and CEO of the National Business Group on Health, and will assume her new role with NQF in March. Cassel is off to help design the new Kaiser Permanente med school in California.

PLANNED PARENTHOOD GOES AFTER DALEIDEN — Planned Parenthood on Thursday filed a civil lawsuit against the anti-abortion activists who released sting videos targeting the organization, Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn reports. The suit alleges activist David Daleiden and his colleagues broke contracts and used fake driver's licenses to illegally record Planned Parenthood staff. "There was a dramatic increase in the threats, harassment, and criminal activities targeting abortion providers and their supporters and, in particular, Planned Parenthood health centers after the release of defendants' videos," Planned Parenthood wrote in its complaint, which was filed in U.S. District Court in San Francisco. Daleiden says let's go: "Game on," he said in an emailed statement. "I look forward to deposing all the CEOs, Medical Directors, and their co-conspirators who participated in Planned Parenthood's illegal baby body parts racket."

FIRST IN PULSE: DEMS PUSH BURWELL ON ACA CIVIL RIGHTS PROVISION — "Discrimination in our health care system is harming, and costing, lives in communities across the country — and that is unacceptable," Senators Sherrod Brown, Patty Murray, and 13 Democratic colleagues write in a letter to Secretary Burwell today. HHS has proposed a rule to implement the ACA's Section 1557, which protects against discrimination in access to health care, but the Democrats say the regulation needs to go further to ensure racial, religious, gender, and disability protections. And their timing is notable: Martin Luther King, Jr. Day is Monday.

CONGRESS TO MARTIN SHKRELI: SHOW US YOUR FINANCES — The House Oversight Committee will hold a hearing on Jan. 26 to examine the rising cost of prescription drugs, and they've asked Shkreli to provide profits, expenses, and a slew of other private financial data about his company. The pharma CEO was only too happy to boast about his financial acumen when he hiked the price of Daraprim by more than 5,000 percent last fall. Something tells me he's a little less willing to talk to Congress. Read the letter.

FROM THE GOP RETREAT: NO NEWS IS … FILL IN THE BLANK — Paul Demko also kept an eye on Republicans’ joint legislative retreat, but health care — entitlement reform, for example — didn’t come up on Thursday. Does it matter? Only because House Speaker Paul Ryan had hoped to use the retreat to set an ambitious 2016 agenda for the party. The Senate Republicans left early; the House wraps up today.

WHAT'S AT THE HEART OF FLORIDA'S SAFETY RULE CHANGE? — CNN on Thursday implied that Florida may have nixed important and decades-old safety regulations because hospitals gave $200,000 to Gov. Rick Scott and other state Republicans. The story also follows an earlier CNN investigation, which found that one of Tenet's Florida hospitals hadn't met quality standards for children's heart surgery.

To be clear: CNN couldn't directly connect the dollars and the decision. But they note a fair amount of circumstantial evidence, including how Florida killed the quality standards within two months of CNN's earlier report and after lawmakers received Tenet's donations. Representatives from Tenet and Scott's office denied the charges.

COMMONWEALTH FUND ADDS VP — Shawn Bishop is joining The Commonwealth Fund as their new Vice President for Cost Control and Medicare. Bishop has been a consultant since 2010, but previously worked at CBO, CMS, and the Senate Finance Committee.

BEST STORY OF THE WEEK? When I was running the Advisory Board's Daily Briefing, I kept a running tally of great health journalism every year, and I want to keep that tradition going at Pulse.

This week's pick: An incredible New York Times Magazine story on one company's chemical pollution cover-up and the lawyer who spent years fighting to expose it.

Got a better longread in mind? Email me at ddiamond@politico.com or find me on twitter at @ddiamond.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by David Pittman

STAT News tells us how to judge if Vice President Joe Biden’s “moonshot” is for real or political talk: http://bit.ly/1SRlFGx

“Moonshot” or not, the NIH is using genomic data to solve cancer puzzles, the Washington Post reports: http://wapo.st/1Olsw84

Also in the Post, a reporter asks if the mentally ill are unfairly targeted in the FBI's gun database: http://wapo.st/1Kg1KtK

A New York Post columnist tears apart Hillary Clinton’s health plan: http://nyp.st/1lc52Yy

Health insurer Anthem says pharmacy benefit manager Express Scripts overcharges it $3 billion a year, according to Bloomberg: http://bloom.bg/1NaKDcP

** A message from PhRMA: Everyone has a story. We want to hear yours. Whether you are a patient like 9-year-old Ellie, a caregiver like Diane, or a general supporter, we want to hear your story about the positive & transformational impact that medicines have had on you or your loved ones. Submit your story to be part of the “I’m Not Average” campaign today at http://onphr.ma/1PI5n1T. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **