Image 1 of 7

Brink Named Chair of American College of Radiology

ACR Names New Officers During ACR 2016—The Crossroads of Radiology

Add to Favorites

Contact Information Available for logged-in reporters only

Newswise — Reston, Va. (May 17, 2016) — The American College of Radiology (ACR) Board of Chancellors has elected James A. Brink, MD, FACR, as its chair. Also elected were Geraldine McGinty, MD, MBA, FACR, who will serve as vice chair, and Howard B. Fleishon, MD, MMM, FACR, who will serve a second term as secretary-treasurer. The new officers took office at ACR 2016—The Crossroads of Radiology®, the all-member annual meeting held in Washington, DC.

“A long-time advocate for radiology and high-quality patient care, James Brink has shown outstanding leadership in every ACR role in which he has served, most recently as vice chair,” said ACR Chief Executive Officer (CEO) William T. Thorwarth, MD, FACR. “We look forward to his continued outstanding leadership as chair of the ACR Board of Chancellors,” said Thorwarth.

Chair James A. Brink, MD, FACR

Brink was nominated by the board Nominating Committee and elected by the Board of Chancellors as its chair. He is radiologist-in-chief at Massachusetts General Hospital and the Juan M. Taveras Professor of Radiology at Harvard Medical School, both in Boston. An internationally recognized expert in radiation safety, Brink was instrumental in developing the ACR/RSNA Image Wisely® program. He is a past chair of the ACR Commission on Body Imaging, past co-chair of Image Wisely and serves on the Journal of the American College of Radiology (JACR) editorial board.

Vice Chair Geraldine McGinty, MD, MBA, FACR

McGinty was nominated by the board Nominating Committee and elected by the Board of Chancellors as vice chair. She has served the last four years as chair of the ACR Commission on Economics and is an editorial board member and reviewer for JACR. She is a leader of the College’s Imaging 3.0™ efforts to ensure that radiologists are prepared to function effectively in emerging alternate payment models and value-based payment systems. McGinty has also served as the ACR representative to the American Medical Association (AMA) Relative Value Scale Update Committee (RUC). She serves as assistant chief contracting officer and assistant professor of radiology at Weill Cornell Medicine and as an assistant attending radiologist at New York-Presbyterian Hospital, both in New York.

Secretary-Treasurer Howard B. Fleishon, MD, MMM, FACR

Fleishon was nominated by the board Nominating Committee and re-elected by the Board of Chancellors as secretary-treasurer. He has held numerous roles within ACR, including council speaker, vice chair of the Commission on Government Relations and chair of the Radiology Advocacy Network (RAN). Fleishon is currently chair of the ACR Foundation executive committee. He serves as chief of radiology services at Emory Johns Creek Hospital, Johns Creek, GA, and division director of community radiology services at the Emory department of radiology and imaging services, Atlanta, GA.

President Bibb Allen Jr., MD, FACR

Bibb Allen Jr., MD, FACR, was nominated by the College Nominating Committee and elected ACR president by the Council. He is a diagnostic radiologist at Grandview Medical Center in Birmingham, AL, and member of the Birmingham Radiological Group. Allen is the former chair of the ACR Board of Chancellors, former chair of the ACR Commission on Economics and former ACR representative to the RUC. He served as chair of the Harvey L. Neiman Health Policy Institute’s advisory board and a designer and leading proponent of Imaging 3.0, the College’s strategy for moving toward value-based health care.



Vice President Cheri L. Canon, MD, FACR

Cheri L. Canon, MD, FACR, who was nominated by the College Nominating Committee and elected vice president by the Council, is program chair of ACR 2016. She is professor and chair of radiology and Witten-Stanley Endowed Chair of Radiology at the University of Alabama at Birmingham. A member of the ACR Board of Chancellors and immediate past-chair of the Commission on Education, she also serves on the board Self Evaluation Committee and the board Nominating Committee. She is an associate editor of the JACR, a member of the American Institute for Radiologic Pathology (AIRP) board of directors and member of the Radiology Leadership Institute board.

ACR 2016—The Crossroads of Radiology

ACR 2016, the all-member ACR annual meeting, is being held May 15–19 in Washington, DC. It includes more than 100 concurrent sessions and general sessions featuring nationally renowned faculty and a keynote speech delivered by Ezekiel J. (Zeke) Emanuel, MD, PhD, an architect of the Affordable Care Act and a leading practitioner shaping the future of health care.

About the American College of Radiology

The American College of Radiology (ACR), founded in 1924, is a professional medical society dedicated to serving patients and society by empowering radiology professionals to advance the practice, science and professions of radiological care.

To arrange an interview with an ACR member, please contact Shawn Farley at 703-648-8936, Maryann Verrillo at 703-390-9822 or email PR@acr.org.



Reporters: follow Looking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an

Expert Query. follow @Expert_Pitch to receive instant updates via TwitterLooking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an Promote your organization’s experts with Expert Pitch

Comment/Share