Black Bean Co. at 869 Folly Road is falling victim to federal policy changes, according to its owner. The restaurant will close Tuesday, ending a 4½-year run at the James Island location.

Owner Ellis Grossman said the restaurant is the top performer of the three he owns and operates, but because of changes in federal health care insurance laws and overtime regulations, he said it’s not financially viable to keep all of them open.

He said “it makes more sense” to focus on his King Street shop in downtown Charleston because he recently acquired a beer and wine license for the location. He employs 20 people at the James Island restaurant. The other restaurant is in Columbia.

Grossman will sublease the Folly Road space to a new sandwich shop called The Hen and The Goat, which will be operated by Thomas Smith within 90 days, he said.

Record run

After 45 years, an Upper King Street business has called it quits.

Honest John’s TV Repair and Record Shop at 509 King closed last Thursday.

“Business wasn’t like it used to be,” said shop owner James Peterson. “On a 100 percent scale, we have only been doing about 30 percent of what the store used to do. It has been declining for about 30 years.”

Now 68, Peterson said it’s time to relax.

The shop repaired all types of televisions and sold all kinds of music. The store’s stock was donated to Habitat for Humanity.

Peterson, a former police officer for several years, is now a volunteer chaplain with the Coastal Crisis Chaplaincy. He lives on Johns Island.

“I believe in giving back,” Peterson said. “Charleston has been so good to us.”

Springing to life

A new coffee shop is headed to midtown Charleston.

Bearded Cafe & Coffee has leased a 275-square-foot space at 121 Spring St., according to real estate agency Coldwell Banker Commercial Atlantic. A January opening is planned, but it could open earlier if build-out and permitting happen more quickly. The owner/operators of the new to-go cafe are Rick Wofford, Rick Summers and Scott Morouse.

On the way

Dairy Queen is headed to Goose Creek.

The former Tenichi Steak House at 203-A N. Goose Creek Blvd. recently sold for $575,000 to WD LLC, which plans to do business as Dairy Queen, according to the commercial real estate firm Lee & Associates. CresCom Bank sold the 2,605-square-foot, free-standing restaurant.

Also, Walterboro is getting a new IHOP. The new restaurant will be built in front of the Wal-Mart Supercenter at 2110 Bells Highway, Lee & Associates said.

Circling back

Starting in January, all Kangaroo Express stores throughout the Southeast will be rebranded Circle K.

Kangaroo Express started in 1967 as The Pantry in North Carolina and now boasts more than 1,500 Kangaroo Express stores in 13 states. In March, The Pantry was acquired by Canada-based Couche-Tard, which lists Circle K as its largest and more international brand.

The rebranding will be completed within six to nine months.

Pet project opens

The new Petco at 1101 N. Main St. in Summerville will have a ribbon-cutting ceremony at 8:55 a.m. Saturday. The pet superstore in the new Earth Fare-anchored Summerville Marketplace Shopping Center opened earlier this week.

The first 100 Pals Rewards customers Saturday will receive a free $10 gift card. The first 50 Pals Rewards customers Sunday will get a free tote bag. The shop will offer pet adoptions as well.

Different field

Golden Sun Taxi, the solar-powered golf-cart taxi business on Folly Beach started by three College of Charleston graduates, has shut down after just over a year in business, according to Matt Coda, one of the co-owners.

“Uber was the catalyst,” Coda said, referring to the new ride-offering service via an app that is competing with traditional taxi businesses across the country.

Two of the original Golden Sun operators — Coda and Jake Coutreau — have now turned to a drone aerial video photography business called Vive Media. Find them on Facebook.

Do you know of a business that is opening, closing or expanding? Reach Warren L. Wise at (843) 937-5524 or twitter.com/warrenlancewise.