Dan Moxley: Retirement of Walter Stosch leaves only one Medicaid-expanding GOP member in Senate

Join AFP's 112,000+ followers on Facebook, Twitter and YouTube

Subscribe to sports and news podcasts on iTunes

News, press releases, letters to the editor: chris@augustafreepress.com

Advertising inquiries: crystal@augustafreepress.com

24th District State Senate Republican nomination candidate Dan Moxley responded to the news today from Richmond that State Senator Walter Stosch is retiring from the Virginia General Assembly after 33 years.

“Senator Stosch has seen the writing on the wall. Virginians don’t want Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion. Two of the three Obamacare Medicaid Senate Republicans are retiring; I’m running to retire the third – Emmett Hanger,” Moxley said. Senator John Watkins was the first to announce retirement after receiving a primary challenge announcement from Steve Thomas, a Republican activist and businessman.

“Voters know that we need real, drastic change in the direction of our Commonwealth. Liberal, intrusive, big government policies are contrary to our founding principles of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. One of my goals as a senator is to cut overreaching government regulations and taxes that are increasingly breaking the backs of our fellow Virginians, Moxley continued.

The retirement of the three most liberal republicans in the Virginia Senate this year, following the ouster of House Majority Leader Eric Cantor last year, would reflect one of the biggest changes in direction of Virginia politics in recent history, as well as a rise in the power of the grassroots to dictate the direction of the Republican Party from the ground up.

Dan Moxley is an entrepreneur and small business-owner. He holds an undergraduate degree in Electrical Engineering, and a graduate degree in Religion. Studies in history, languages, and debate spurred Dan’s interest in Constitutional principles and limited government, and incited a desire for principled statesmen to restore them. Dan married his wife Jan in 1987, and they have 7 children. Dan’s website can be found at www.DanMoxley.com.