Nuclear Option: The first spoil of Harry Reid’s shredding of the Senate’s historic filibuster rules has been confirmed to the D.C. Circuit. Patricia Millett is another radical activist masquerading as judge.

As chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee in 1990, now-Vice President Joseph Biden threw a fit after it was clear David Souter was going to be confirmed to the Supreme Court, warning the first Bush administration that no more “stealth” nominees would be getting through.

Liberals threw an even bigger fit the next year when Clarence Thomas told Biden’s committee he had no “personal opinion on the outcome in Roe v. Wade.”

But Souter and Thomas’ non-candor before the committee pales in comparison to the balderdash peddled by Patricia Millett.

As Carrie Severino noted in National Review earlier this year, when Sen. Ted Cruz, R.-Texas, asked Millett under oath to “describe how you would characterize your judicial philosophy, and identify which U.S. Supreme Court justice’s judicial philosophy from the Warren, Burger, or Rehnquist Courts is most analogous with yours,” Millett handed the U.S. Senate pure falsity.

“I cannot claim familiarity with any particular judicial philosophies the justices might possess,” the Clinton Justice Department veteran who has argued 32 cases before the Supreme Court, contended. “Nor do I have a judicial philosophy myself.”

As Severino noted, even second-year law students applying for clerkships get asked in interviews “to name the judge whose approach to the law they most admire” or “the judicial philosophy they most identify with.” An interviewee who stammered to a judge that he or she had no philosophical outlook or wasn’t familiar with any judges would be considered intellectually unfit.

Of course, Millett, who will now be sworn in, on to arguably the second most powerful court in the country, has plenty of interest in law, as her damning record proves.

On same-sex marriage, for instance, an MSNBC interview a year ago reveals Millett has found a clever way to make liberalism actually sound conservative. Fighting against the radical re-definition of marriage at the federal level — supported by none other than Millett’s former boss, that great defender of traditional marriage, President Bill Clinton — violates states rights, Millett argues.

“Historically that’s always been the job of the states to decide what marriage is — to define it — and so,” Millett argued, “that really is the federal government stepping somewhere where it hasn’t before.”

Sound like someone with no judicial philosophy?

But Millett not only has a radical legal ideology; she’s a through-and-through political operator.

She provided written endorsements for Obama’s radical Supreme Court nominations of Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan, three other Obama judicial nominations, and Donald Verrilli, the solicitor general who argued ObamaCare before the high court.

And Millett’s regard for the Constitution’s freedoms do not extend to law school Christian societies being allowed to restrict their membership solely to Christians, because doing so wouldn’t “foster community involvement,” Millett wrote in a law review article.

Keeping a political operative like Patricia Millett off the D.C. Circuit is exactly what the Senate filibuster is for. Thanks to Harry Reid, it is now just as dead as this newest judge’s respect for the Constitution.