NEW BRAUNFELS, Texas, Sept. 3, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Nexus Medical has launched Analytix Health, a new division providing medical practice management, healthcare financial consulting, and business services locally and nationally. Analytix is a response to the growing needs of healthcare providers, attorneys, employers, and insurers in Texas and throughout the US.

The demand for healthcare in Texas is growing rapidly. From 2000 - 2011, the Central Texas population increased by nearly 43% and Central Texas is the country's fastest-growing metropolitan area. Physician supply is increasing in Texas via practice start-ups and relocations and the number of in-state, licensed, practicing physicians has grown by over 4,700 physicians over the four year period ending in 2012, a 9.9% increase over that period. However, Texas is 46th in the US in terms of physicians/capita at 20.76 per 10,000 residents compared to the national average of 24.2. Efforts to increase the number of healthcare providers in Texas are ongoing.

Medical practice has become increasingly complex. ICD-10, Value Based Contracts, ACOs, regulations and other initiatives have brought changes and pressure. Practice executives juggle these changes with the challenge of operating a profitable medical practice in an increasingly hostile reimbursement environment.

Ed Bolton, President of Nexus Medical, explains that "Analytix Health is a natural progression of the Nexus model. The business complexities for medical practice and the insurance industry as a result of PPACA, aka Obamacare, signed into law in 2010, and the resulting rules which have been rolling out constantly ever since, have increased the need for professional, expert support to all stakeholders in our healthcare system."

After five years in medical consulting, Nexus has launched Analytix Health. Analytix consultants provide regulatory guidance, coding and compliance reviews, benchmarking, process analysis, re-design, implementation, and monitoring, billing and coding review, out of network bill negotiation, and U&C analysis as well as transcription, coding, billing, insurance follow-up, and accounts receivable services. Learn more at www.analytixhealth.com.

About Nexus Medical

Nexus provides utilization review and independent medical review for the risk management and claims management industry nationwide. Founded in 2009, Nexus has grown to 140 employees and a panel of 350 board certified physicians. Nexus provides hundreds of reviews daily to nationally recognized URAC companies. Services include Pre-Authorization Reviews, Retrospective Reviews, Medication Reviews, Disability Reviews, and Group Health Reviews. Learn more at visit www.nexmc.com.

Contact: Ed Bolton, P: 512-216-6711, ebolton@nexmc.com

SOURCE Nexus Medical