Don't take too seriously the reports that Gov. Rick Scott is among Donald Trump's prospective running mates.

Scott's people likely fed or encouraged the idea. Scott already is looking beyond his current job. His political action committee has raised about $5 million since Scott's re-election 15 months ago. The disengaged-from-Tallahassee governor uses the money to promote his narrow priorities — tax cuts, economic incentives — and thus to promote himself.

Most speculation has had Scott challenging Bill Nelson for a Senate seat in 2018. If Trump picked Scott and they lost, the Senate still could be a fallback. When Charlie Crist looked like the transformational Republican, the Legislature allowed governors to keep their job if they run for federal office.

Though the Crist of 2008 might have helped John McCain in Florida, Scott would offer Trump little assistance. The governor whose hospital company defrauded the government couldn't win a majority in low-turnout elections against Alex Sink, who ran an inept campaign, or Crist, the former Republican whom the Florida Democratic Party turned to in desperation.

Scott also would not balance a Trump ticket. Forget that both are older white men; Trump is 69 and Scott is 63. Both also are older white men who invent their own reality, duck responsibility for mistakes and overstate accomplishments.

The governor made news last month with an op-ed article for USA Today headlined "Donald Trump Has America's Pulse." The article had all the credibility of Trump's claim that Mexico is sending "rapists" across our southern border.

Scott wrote that Trump "is capturing the frustration of many Americans after seven years of President Obama's very intentional government takeover of the U.S. economy." Asked for examples of this "very intentional takeover," a Scott press aide promised to supply some — but never did, after repeated requests.

Scott also wrote that "after seven years of endless and tedious regulation and taxation, it is nearly unaffordable" to start a business in the United States. The governor likely is following a Republican talking point about the number of pages the Obama administration has added to the Federal Register.

Fact-checking reports, however, have noted that many pages in the register don't deal with regulations. In addition, during its first six years the Obama administration published roughly the same number of pages as the Bush administration did during its first six years.

For 2015, according to the Kauffman Report on business start-ups, the rate of new businesses rose, "reversing a downward trend that started in 2010 and experiencing the largest year-over-year increase from the past two decades." In January, the Wells Fargo/Gallup Small Business Confidence Index hit its highest level in a year.

And, of course, the governor praised himself for being ahead of his pledge to create 700,000 jobs in seven years. Candidate Scott, however, promised 700,000 more jobs than the 1 million forecasters expected Florida's economy to add as the state emerged from the recession. Scott now disavows that pledge, despite recordings of him making it, because he would be behind, not ahead.

Trump would understand. He talks about his successful real estate deals. He doesn't talk about Trump University, Trump Mortgage, Trump Steaks, Trump Casinos, Trump Airlines, Trump: The Game, Trump Magazine and Trump Vodka, to name a few of his failed ventures. Trump does promise Americans "so much winning," based on his record.

Trump also promises that he would create jobs by deporting immigrants who supposedly have stolen them. This week, however, The New York Times reported that almost 300 Americans have applied to work at Trump's Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach but only 17 have been hired. Instead, Trump sought roughly 500 visas for foreign workers. He claimed that the local applicants weren't qualified. Local job placement officials disagree.

Like Trump, Scott opposes the Affordable Care Act. Like Trump, Scott has no alternative. Obama did botch the rollout of the health care exchange website, but the rollout of Scott's website for unemployed Floridians was so bad that the state needed help from ... the Obama administration.

Americans aren't starting business, Scott wrote, "because they would pay more in taxes and federal health care mandates than they could make in profits." He doesn't provide numbers, because the claim is false. As Trump would agree, however, it sounds good. What else matters?

Randy Schultz is the former editorial page editor of The Palm Beach Post.