The woman who was shot by her estranged husband at a West New York nail salon had been abused by him for nearly two decades, her mother, 17-year-old son and long-time employer said yesterday.

“She always lived under threats,” her mother, 60-year-old Maria Monteagudo, said through a translator. “She stayed with him out of fear.”

Monteagudo, who lives in Cuba but was visiting her daughter for an extended period, said Midalis Sanchez-Monteagudo tried to hide the domestic violence from her because of the 60-year-old’s heart problems.

Sanchez-Monteagudo, who had been living with her children in Teaneck since June, was shot dead by her husband, Jose Leonel Martinez Gelabert, Wednesday afternoon at the nail salon where she worked. Gelabert then took his own life.

Sanchez-Monteagudo’s 17-year-old son said he didn’t see his mother get shot in the head, but he watched in horror as his father stood over Sanchez-Monteagudo’s lifeless body and shot her five more times inside the shop at 49th Street and Bergenline Avenue.

The 36-year-old mother of three had voiced her fears numerous times that the 39-year-old Gelabert would try to kill her, friends and family said. She had a temporary restraining order against Gelabert from May 14 to Oct. 11.

Sanchez-Monteagudo’s son, mother and her employer, Truc “Joe” Dinh, told The Jersey Journal that Sanchez-Monteagudo had applied for a permanent restraining order against Gelabert in October, but it was denied.

“The judge smiled at her while she was crying, after she told him ‘it’ll be your fault if my kids and I die,’” said Sanchez-Monteagudo’s teen son, who didn’t want to be identified for this story.

Multiple attempts to access court records at the Hudson County Administration Building were re-directed to trial court administrator Gerald A. Buccafusco, who was out of the office yesterday, according to HCC Family Division manager Deidra Carvin.

The murder-suicide leaves the ex-couple’s three children — they also have a 9-year-old boy and a 2-year-old girl — without parents.

Sanchez-Monteagudo served her husband divorce papers two weeks prior to the incident, according to Tony Castro, the son of the godfather of the couple’s second child.

Monteagudo said she had forbid her daughter from marrying Gelabert before they left Cuba, but that her daughter was “basically forced” to sign the marriage license.

“I looked into the family and found that they were no good,” she said. “The family had a really big drinking problem.”

The 17-year-old, his grandmother and Dinh, the owner of the nail salon, painted Gelabert as violent, out-of-control and obsessive. “He would beat his mom, get in fights with his siblings,” Sanchez-Monteagudo’s mom said.

Sanchez-Monteagudo’s son yesterday showed a three-inch scar on his arm that he got when his dad threw a plate at him and stitched it up himself. The boy also has a scar on his face that was caused by his dad.

In a video Gelabert recorded on his cell phone, Gelabert is seen brandishing two guns, playing with them and then posing with them as he smiled into the camera.

Dinh, the owner of the nail salon, said that law enforcement officials knew Sanchez-Monteagudo was the victim of domestic violence for years, but that “nobody listened.”

“She was begging, but the law didn’t protect her. She screamed with her voice and heart, but nobody listened,” he said. “All the people in West New York knew, West New York police knew he had a domestic violence record, but nobody did nothing.”

West New York Police Director Robert Antolos said there was at least one report of domestic violence between Sanchez-Monteagudo and Gelabert, but he could not provide additional information without permission from the Hudson County Prosecutor’s Office, which refused to grant that permission.

Dinh said that Gelabert would have killed the other four people in the salon if the gun he used had not jammed.

Dinh said he screamed at the 17-year-old to lock himself into the bathroom at the far end of the salon. That’s when Gelabert turned his gun on Dinh and the other two customers in the salon. That’s when the gun jammed, Dinh said.

Before anyone could stop him, Gelabert ran to the back of the salon, where his son had shut himself inside the bathroom.

The teen was trying to dial 911, but couldn’t because his hands were shaking so violently, he said. Stunned, he even forgot to lock the door, he said yesterday.

When Gelabert opened the door a crack, the boy quickly shut it and locked it, he said.

At that point Dinh screamed at Gelabert, diverting his attention.

“I felt strong, I wanted to fight,” said Dinh, who at 5-foot-2 was dwarfed by the 6-4 Gelabert. “I wasn’t scared.”

Gelabert fired a bullet into the ceiling, knocked Dinh into a mirror and then pistol-whipped him, said Dinh, who was sporting fresh stitches in the back of his head yesterday.

Dazed, Dinh found himself staring down the barrel of Gelabert’s gun. But like before, the gun jammed, Dinh said, and Gelabert fled down Bergenline Avenue.