Phil Robertson of "Duck Dynasty" isn't the only celebrity this year to find out that freedom of speech doesn't mean freedom from consequences.

If you need proof, look no farther than this gang of celebrities, who have experienced first-hand just how much damage a simple comment or action can cause.



Whether they were fired, suspended, lost the public's trust or were simply just removed from the general population's good graces, these public figures all suffered from a controversial 2013.

Phil Robertson



Fresh off his "start with homosexual behavior and just morph out from there" comments to GQ magazine, A&E Network announced last night that it has put 'Duck Dynasty' star Phil Robertson on indefinite hiatus.

Though the Robertson family patriarch released a comment earlier in the day saying he would never disrespect someone of differing beliefs, the network still cut him from the program after various organizations, including GLAAD, and individuals spoke out against his comments. What the duck, right?

Julianne Hough



While actress and dancer Julianne Hough typically keeps a low profile, that all changed on Halloween night when she donned blackface as part of her costume. Hough went as "Crazy Eyes", a character from the hit show "Orange is the New Black," and used bronzer and other make-up items to darken her complexion.

After receiving angry messages from Twitter users, Hough issued an apology about the costume, tweeting "I am a huge fan of the show Orange Is the New black, actress Uzo Aduba, and the character she has created. It certainly was never my intention to be disrespectful or demeaning to anyone in any way. I realize my costume hurt and offended people and I truly apologize."

Paula Deen



After being sued by a former employee, butter lovin' Paula Deen admitted to using the "n-word" during a deposition taken in May of this year. Following the admission and public outcry, Deen released an apology video on YouTube, saying "inappropriate, hurtful language is totally unacceptable."

The apology came too late for The Food Network though, which announced it would not be renewing Deen's contract when it expired that month. The discrimination lawsuit was dismissed in August by a federal judge after a settlement was reached, but the damage was already done, ya'll.

Lil Wayne

In June of 2013, rapper Lil Wayne was videotaped trampling an American flag while filming the music video for his song "God Bless Amerika" in New Orleans. While the public was outraged by the act, the rapper said it was completely unintentional, tweeting "I didn't step on the flag on purpose! It's a scene in a video where the flag drops behind me and after it drop it's just there as I perform."

Alec Baldwin

In November, actor Alec Baldwin lost his place at the MSNBC desk after yelling a gay slur at a paparazzi cameraman and videographer. While Baldwin's representative insisted the actor wasn't fired from his show, "Up Late with Alec Baldwin," the decision to suspend the talk show came two weeks after video of Baldwin's exchange was posted on TMZ.com.

Justin Bieber

While singer Justin Bieber has experienced a fall from his squeaky clean appearance over the past few years, he made waves in April after he left a note at Amsterdam's Anne Frank House saying that "Anne was a great girl. Hopefully she would have been a belieber." The comment received a lot of criticism in the following weeks, despite Frank's stepsister;s support of it. Bieber has yet to release an official statement on the matter.

President Barack Obama



Of course, celebrities aren't the only ones that might want to think before they speak. President Barack Obama has received plenty of heat this year following his infamous "if you like your healthcare plan, you can keep your healthcare plan, period" statement in 2010.

While the statement may have been technically true for some people, it probably should have included an asterisk at the end to indicate a mountain of fine print. The "grandfather" clause of the Affordable Care Act maintains that those who signed up for their insurance plan before the act went into effect can keep their same plan. However, many others had their plans canceled only to be offered Affordable Care Act compliant plans at higher premiums.

Of course, those who received the "your current plan will be discontinued effective January 1, 2014, and you will need to select a new plan by the end of December to avoid any interruption in coverage" letters from various insurance companies know all about that.

Barry Hinson



Southern Illinois basketball coach Barry Hinson was also in the spotlight for all the wrong reasons this year after he went on a 6-minute rant following a game loss. During the rant, he called out players for being "absolutely awful," and screamed comments about his wife being a better basketball player, among other things.

Hinson later went on "The Dan Patrick Show" to apologize for the comments, sorta. Well, he said he probably shouldn't have called anyone out by name and his wife may not be that good at basketball. Okay, so he really didn't apologize all that much, but he, so far, hasn't lost his job.

Kanye West



Rapper Kanye West hasn't let anyone down when it comes to starting controversy this year. Whether it was he decision to wear the confederate flag in November, have a look-a-like Jesus appear on stage with him during a concert in October or name his album 'Yeezus,' West created a storm of public outcry and dispute in 2013.

"React how you want. Any energy is good energy," said West in regards to the Confederate flag debacle. "You know the Confederate flag represented slavery in a way -- that's my abstract take on what I know about it. So I made the song 'New Slaves.' So I took the Confederate flag and made it my flag. It's my flag. Now what are you going to do?"