Man, 22, charged in fight that left older man dead







DeAndre Maia Browse for Republican American Reprints



WATERBURY — A 22-year-old city man has been charged in the homicide of a 52-year-old man who died after his head hit the pavement following a fight on East Main Street.



DeAndre Maia was charged with second-degree manslaughter after police say he punched John Fitzgerald in the face in October, which led to this death.



Police initially encountered Fitzgerald when they responded to a call of a fight behind an apartment building at 770 E. Main St.on Oct. 27.



Fitzgerald's assailants were gone by the time police arrived. He refused medical treatment and didn't have any visible injuries, police said. He also told police he was drunk, according to Maia's arrest warrant.



The fight was apparently sparked when Fitzgerald asked two men drinking beer behind his apartment building to leave the property, witnesses told police.



One of the men, who was described as a Hispanic with a bigger build, whacked the bill of Fitzgerald's hat downward, then punched him in the face twice, a witness told police.



Fitzgerald fell straight to the ground, hitting the back of his head on the pavement after being punched. He was out cold, but eventually regained consciousness. He refused help from the ambulance crew that responded and went back into his apartment to "sleep it off," according to police.



Police were called to Fitzgerald's apartment the next day after a friend found him laid out on the floor, unresponsive. He was placed on life support at Saint Mary's Hospital after doctors found his skull was cracked and he was bleeding in his brain. He died two days later.



A medical examiner later ruled Fitzgerald's death a homicide due to complications from a blunt injury to the head.



On the day a story about Fitzgerald's death appeared in the Republican-American, police received a call to the confidential Crime Stoppers tip line from a person who identified the two men involved in the fight.



Soon after, police tied Maia and another man to the assault using surveillance footage from a nearby restaurant. That second man has not been charged.



During a recorded interview, Maia told police Fitzgerald started yelling and cursing at him after discovering he was hanging out behind the building. Fitzgerald then punched him, so he hit him back, but didn't believe the punch had much force, he told police.



Maia was arraigned Friday in Waterbury Superior Court, where his attorney, Louis Avitabile, described the events that led to his client's arrest as an "unfortunate incident."



Maia doesn't have a criminal record and attended adult education in the city.



Maia, of 15 Market St., was also charged with criminal trespass. He was expected to post a $50,000 bond late Friday.

Follow Us