Lali carries balloons to sell on a beach in Mumbai, India, on Sunday. The United Nations General Assembly marks Oct. 11 as the International Day of the Girl Child to recognize girls’ rights and the unique challenges girls face around the world. Rafiq Maqbool/Associated Press …

The sailboat Roberta III on its way to winning the 47th Barcolana regatta in the Gulf of Trieste on Sunday. More than 1,600 boats took part in the regatta. giuseppe cacace/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Belarusian army soldiers leave voting cabins at a polling station during presidential elections in Minsk, Belarus, on Sunday. Dmitry Lovetsky/Associated Press …

Thousands of runners participate in the Chicago Marathon on Sunday. Dickson Chumba captured the men’s title, leading the second straight Kenyan podium sweep by finishing before Sammy Kitwara and Sammy Ndungu. Chumba finished in two hours nine minutes 25 seconds, which was 25 seconds before Kitwara. Nam Y. Huh/Associated Press …

A woman and her daughter pay their respects at statues of North Korea’s founder Kim Il Sung, left, and late leader Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang on Sunday. Isolated North Korea marked the 70th anniversary of its ruling Workers' Party on Saturday with a massive military parade overseen by leader Kim Jong Un, who said his country was ready to fight any war waged by the U.S. damir sagolj/Reuters …

Iranians attend the funeral of Revolutionary Guard Gen. Hossein Hamedani, on the poster, in Tehran on Sunday. Hamedani, a senior commander of the Guard, was killed by Islamic State extremists last week near the Syrian city of Aleppo, according to a state TV report. Vahid Salemi/Associated Press …

A model wearing a Libyan traditional robe checks her cellphone Saturday during a fashion show featuring traditional designs as part of the Culture and Arts Festival at the site of the former royal palace, also known as People's Palace, in Tripoli. Mohamed Ben Khalifa/Associated Press …

People dance in front of the Schoeneberg Town Hall during the Festival of Lights in Berlin on Saturday. The 10th Festival of Lights runs until Oct. 18. frank kleefeldt/European Pressphoto Agency …

A resident waves to an overcrowded fishing boat carrying migrants after they crossed the Aegean sea from Turkey to Greece on Sunday. A new European Union plan to move tens of thousands of asylum seekers from Italy and Greece to elsewhere in the bloc will start at the end of this week. Lesbos, the third-largest Greek island, has been overwhelmed with migrants from Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq. yannis kolesidis/European Pressphoto Agency …