The dedication for Rocky Mountain National Park was held in Horseshoe Park with Mount Chapin to the right and the shoulder of Sundance Mountain to the left. ( Estes Park Area Historical Museum )

Enos Mills took on the issue of establishing Rocky Mountain National Park as a personal quest. He was a naturalist, author, lecturer, lodge owner, photographer and the guiding light for the creation of a major national park. (Estes Park Area Historical Museum)

It might seem like the opening of Rocky Mountain National Park in 1915 was a single event, however, it was an evolutionary process.

Enos Mills, however, is credited with spearheading the project. In the words of C. W. Buchholtz in his book, "Rocky Mountain National Park — A History," "While many other individuals contributed to the success of the national park, Enos Mills adopted the issue as a personal quest."

The area now occupied by Rocky Mountain National Park had been exploited for over five decades since Joel Estes and his family first set eyes on the then unoccupied park and settled there in 1860.

It included ranches, extensive logging operations, many rental cabins, lodges, private homes, a few mines and even a mining town. Water diversion ditches were dug to bring Western Slope water across to the Front Range.

Added to this were a number of dams, some in the most pristine places. There was so much commercial development in Moraine Park that it had its own post office. Hunting had decreased the animal population in the park, especially the elk.

The Department of Agriculture started a forestry division in 1881. In 1905, the future site of Rocky Mountain National Park was included in the Medicine Bow Forest Reserve.

Advertisement

At first, there was little enforcement of permits required for grazing and logging. Under the direction of H. N. Wheeler, rangers were added to patrol the reserve. Wheeler stuck to the doctrine of multiple use, the same doctrine used today by the Forest Service.

The Estes Park Protective and Improvement Association was formed in 1906 by business leaders to promote the preservation of the area's nature environment. Freelan Stanley and Cornelius Bond took leading roles. It was in their best interests since they depended on tourism. The objective was to promote the natural beauty of the area, but also to provide access through roads and trails.

Standing at the dedication from left to right is publicist Robert Sterling Yard, Enos Mills, Freelan Stanley (with small flag), Colorado Rep. Edward Taylor, Mary Belle King Sherman and Colorado Gov. George Carlson. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

The ideas of Enos Mills were diametrically opposed to those of Wheeler. Mills could see that this ever-increasing commercial development eliminated all hope of a wilderness experience. He was after the preservation of a vast 1,000 square mile area on either side of the Continental Divide.

His views were backed by the Protective Association, and in the process, Estes National Park was proposed. Maps were produced to define the area.

The United States Geological Service evaluated the area for its scenery and unique geology and recommended that 700 square miles be set aside.

Mills bombarded the media with over 60 articles, wrote over 2,000 letters and gave numerous lectures on the subject of establishing a national park. Mills was an excellent photographer and used his talent to show the public hundreds of photographs of the proposed park.

His arguments were based, in part, on his own guests at the Longs Peak Inn. People wanted wilderness. They did not come to see grazing cattle or sawmills with timber from the primeval forest.

In 1913, Congress was presented with its first park bill. Due to decades of commercial development, there were many expected conflicts over private property, grazing permits, water appropriations and so on. These issues delayed any action.

In June 1914, the third and final bill was guided by Congressman Edward Taylor through the House of Representatives. Sen. Charles Thomas eased it through the Senate.

Colorado let Washington, D.C., know where it stood by sending former Gov. John Shafroth, retiring Gov. Elias Ammons and present Gov.-elect George Carlson. Enos Mills was also there.

On Jan. 26, 1915, President Woodrow Wilson signed Rocky Mountain National Park into law. However it was only a third the size as Mills envisioned.

Size did not matter to the Denver Post, which credited Mills as being "The Father of Rocky Mountain National Park."

Sept. 4, 1915, was a milestone in the history of Larimer County as several hundred gathered in Horseshoe Park.

A banner that read, "ROCKY MOUNTAIN NAT'L PARK — DEDICATION, SEP. 4, 1915" was stretched out with a backdrop of spectacular mountain scenery.

The speeches from various officials were short. The crowd sang the National Anthem. Lined up in a row were Gov. George Carlson, Mrs. John D. Sherman of the National Federation of Women's Clubs, Congressman Ed Taylor, Freelan Stanley, Enos Mills and National Park publicist Robert Sterling Yard.

Mills, the only one without a hat, looked relaxed as rain fell softly. It vaulted Mills into the history books as not only a naturalist, author, lecturer, lodge owner, photographer, but as the guiding light in the creation of a major national park.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. For the coming year, his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.