Tarren Bragdon, OCEO of FGA Action, a non-partisan public policy group based on the principles of free enterprise, individual liberty, and limited government. (FGA Action)

(CNSNews.com) – More than three-quarters of Republican voters in four early primary states still oppose Obamacare and say they are much less likely to vote for a presidential candidate who has implemented it or promoted its Medicaid expansion provision, according to a new poll released by FGA Action, a non-partisan public policy group.

“Five years after Obamacare was passed, GOP voters are still angry about it, and they are still ready to send pro-Obamacare candidates packing,” Tarren Bragdon, the group’s OCEO, explained.

“The interesting thing is that there is not a whole lot of conversation about this among the presidential candidates even though this issue is front and center in people’s minds,” Bragdon told CNSNews.com a day before the second scheduled GOP debate.

“But voters have very different priorities from what some candidates want them to be.”

Bragdon said that Obamacare was a “game-changer” in the 2014 midterm elections and predicted it will likely be a major factor in the 2016 presidential election as well.

“We were surprised how strong voters felt about it,” he said. “They don’t want a liberal Republican who enacted Obamacare or lobbied for it to be sent to the White House.”

The telephone poll, which was taken in four early primary states between August 24 and 27, asked 2,182 likely GOP primary voters: “Do you generally support or oppose the federal Affordable Care Act (ACA), commonly known as Obamacare?”

Opposition to the ACA ranged from 85 percent in South Carolina, 83 percent in Iowa, and 81 percent in New Hampshire to 77 percent in Florida.

The poll also found that GOP voter opposition to state expansion of Medicaid to cover able-bodied, working-age adults – an optional component of Obamacare – was also very strong, ranging from 82 percent in South Carolina to 74 percent in Florida.

As of June, nearly 72 million individuals nationwide were enrolled in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP), according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Of the four early primary states where the poll was conducted, only South Carolina and Florida have not expanded Medicaid coverage under the ACA.

However, in the 31 states (which includes D.C.) where Medicaid coverage has been expanded, a surge in enrollees, far beyond initial projections, threatens to upend state budgets when federal funding is reduced from the current 100 percent to 90 percent starting in 2017.

Related: Obama: Expanding Medicaid Under Obamacare ‘Doesn’t Cost You a Dime’