The Andover City Council is largely maintaining a status quo budget for 2016.

“Out of the seven years I’ve been on the council this has probably been one of the easiest budgets that we’ve had to negotiate through,” Council Member Sheri Bukkila said. “The first few weren’t so friendly and led to some late-night discussions about how much not to spend and where to cut and what more can we do. But it was because of those years why we’re sitting where we are today.” As this pie chart shows, property taxes account for a vast majority of the city of Andover’s general fund budget which covers most day-to-day expenses. Courtesy of city of Andover

The city of Andover is budgeting to collect $450,000 more in 2016 than it did in 2015, but a larger tax base from increased property values and commercial and residential development will cover this bump in revenue. So that the average Andover resident won’t notice much of a difference on the city line item of their property tax statement that will soon be mailed out.

Any questions on the city’s 2016 budget and levy can be brought forward to public hearings Dec. 1 and 15. The council will make a final vote Dec. 15.

City Administrator Jim Dickinson estimates that the worst case scenario for a home valued at $250,000 last year would be a $30 tax increase, but he will present real-life examples in December.

The preliminary 2016 levy the council approved 4-0 Sept. 1 increases the gross city tax levy by 4.04 percent to $11.59 million. But the tax rate will remain the same since the city’s total property valuations are increasing by 4.36 percent. Generally speaking, Dickinson said that a person whose home value increases by this much or less should not see a tax increase from the city.

“Although the gross numbers are increasing the tax rate that folks are paying on their property taxes are staying the same,” Council Member Jim Goodrich said. “I like it as a fiscal conservative guy. I think it’s very safe.”

Approximately 69 percent of this levy will cover a multitude of operational expenses with the budgets for the Anoka County Sheriff’s Office contract, Andover Fire Department, building code enforcement, roads and parks maintenance and the salaries and benefits of all city employees being the most notable expenditures. The general fund budget break-down between the major departments. Courtesy of city of Andover

The city also has $2.1 million of debt to pay for, which accounts for about 18 percent of the 2016 gross city levy. The city is repaying its investment in construction of the Andover YMCA Community Center, purchase of equipment and purchase of open space through with this taxpayer money.

The remaining levy is for other various maintenance needs including more than $1 million for the road and bridge fund that contributes to city street maintenance.

According to Dickinson, the city will be using some of its fund balance to keep the levy increase lower.

The sheriff’s office contract is always one of the biggest line items every year in the budget, but the city is only budgeting an $18,000 increase in 2016 compared to an approximately $100,000 increase in 2015. The 2016 sheriff’s office contract is $2.94 million, but state aid and payment from the Anoka-Hennepin School District for the liaison officers at the middle school and high school means the city’s cost will be $2.72 million.

There were no more deputies on the street in 2015 compared to 2014 and there were the same amount of school liaison officers and patrol investigators, but Dickinson said the sheriff’s office did a better job for the 2016 budget in finding ways to operate more efficiently. He noted the sheriff’s office has been investing in more fuel-efficient vehicles and has been doing a better job with vehicle maintenance.

Health care costs for the city may jump by 25 percent because Andover is no longer considered to be a large employer. Dickinson said the federal Affordable Care Act starting in 2016 will define a large employer as one that has 100 or more employees. Andover has 54 employees, which met the current standard of 50. Instead of being evaluated as a group, every one of the 54 employees will be evaluated individually.

The budget has a new line item of $10,000 for open space maintenance. The city’s natural resource technician Kameron Kytonen has been maintaining open space property ever since Andover bought its first property in November 2009 and has received grants to help cover costs of buckthorn removal. Dickinson said this line item was added “to be more transparent.”

The fire department wanted to hire more full-time staff to help with responding to calls that come during the day on weekdays when a lot of the volunteer staff are working out of the community or just not able to leave their jobs. The struggle to get enough people to respond to daytime calls is something many suburban fire departments with volunteer staff are struggling with, fire chiefs around the area have previously told ABC Newspapers.

Dickinson said the city will take another look at how the department is responding to calls and may add part-time staff to help out.

The public works department may also get new part-time staff to help maintain the increasing street mileage coming from all the new housing developments. But like the fire department, Dickinson said the city will first determine if there are ways to be more efficient with the current staff.

A new full-time parks and street maintenance worker was hired earlier this year, partially because of the new Pine Hills North park but also to assist with plowing in the winter and other various streets maintenance needs.

Bukkila said the 20-minute presentation Dickinson gave Sept. 1 is a quick summary of a budget that staff and the council spent many hours throughout the year putting together.

Dickinson said the goal of the city is that there are not steep increases or decreases in its levy to make it easier for residents to plan their own budgets. Andover’s taxable market value increased by 17.57 percent last year but the property levy increase was 2.77 percent.

“We don’t see things come forward that are frightening or unexpected,” Mayor Julie Trude said.

[email protected]