Topics: 2016 Elections, Chris Christie, Editor's Picks, GOP, John Bolton, Marco Rubio, New Hampshire, presidential candidates, Scott Walker, Ted Cruz, The Right, Elections News, News, Politics News

New Hampshire voters are famously spoiled. If any given person only gets to talk to a candidate two times before primary day, it’s considered an insult, a snub. Most people would tire of the never-ending exposure to pandering primary candidates, showing up at their diners or Chick-fil-As or sports bars for folksy conversations with “everyday folks.” This isn’t even counting the bombardment of television ads, set to commence soon, as candidates “seriously considering the possibility of running for president,” as Jeb Bush puts it, make it official. But they love it up here. One attendee at an event this weekend was handing out business cards. The occupation? “Registered New Hampshire Voter.”

The official candidates — Rand Paul, Marco Rubio, and Ted Cruz — gathered at Nashua, New Hampshire’s Crowne Plaza hotel this Friday and Saturday for the First in the Nation Republican Leadership Summit. The summit also featured unofficial candidates who are almost certainly running but can’t quite say so yet for legal/fundraising reasons: Scott Walker, Chris Christie, Jeb Bush, Bobby Jindal, Rick Perry, Carly Fiorina, and Mike Huckabee, to name a few. You also had your for-pretend candidates, like Donald Trump and Lindsey Graham. Beneath them are the YOLO candidates, like former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore, former New York Gov. George Pataki, and former U.N. ambassador John Bolton. All here. Former Maryland Gov. Bob Ehrlich occupies whatever tier is beneath Gilmore and Pataki, and he was here, too. At the very bottom of the pile is this guy. Here.

New Hampshire Republicans are not the same as Iowa Republicans. They’re blunt and talk fast and are in no way intimidated to ask a governor or senator or ambassador whatever’s on their mind, in a shrewd, distrusting what’s your angle here? sort of way. There’s a libertarian bent to the state’s conservative politics and, by and large, no one wants to waste any precious time talking about, say, gay marriage.

This is not to say that the conservative die-hards in New Hampshire don’t have their own quirks. The ones in attendance at the FITN summit, at least, care a lot about ISIS establishing beachheads on the continent and the scourge of “illegals.” If you were wondering last fall why New Hampshire GOP Senate candidate Scott Brown kept going on about ISIS fighters crossing the southern border to infect Americans with Ebola, a few conversations at the Crowne Plaza in Nashua would make it quite clear. There’s a paranoid style to New Hampshire politics.

***

“He’s trying to destroy the country,” a woman in black-and-white shoes and a Diane Keaton-style tie/vest combination, whispered to me during the speech from former U.N. Ambassador John Bolton. She was referring to the current Democratic president — or “Democrat president,” in the parlance of right-wing conferences. Bolton had just said that the “principle responsibility of the President of the United States is to protect the country,” and for this woman, and presumably everyone else in the room, Barack Obama has performed poorly on that score.

Bizarrely enough, I’m more familiar with Bolton’s talking points than any other candidate’s, and the man presents a terrifying view of the world. Everyone is trying to bomb us and our president won’t bomb them, and Bolton can’t stand this, and he’s going to make America care about his particular brand of foreign policy and not all these wishy-washy foofoo issues like education or health care. ISIS is coming for us, Russia is coming for us, China, you name it. And oh, this Iran deal? “The most serious act of appeasement in American history.” Bolton likes to close with a dose of levity, about how he has a special understanding of Hillary Clinton since he was a year apart from Bill and Hillary at Yale Law School. Hillary was a “radical” then, and she’s a radical now. According to Bolton, the way people are in graduate school is pretty much the way they are the rest of their lives, and Hillary Clinton is every bit the leftist that Elizabeth Warren and Barack Obama are. Scared yet?

“I read an article in the Investor’s Business Daily that scared the crap out of me,” an older man began his question to Bolton. Turns out ISIS is setting up training camps in New Mexico, or maybe it’s Mexico-Mexico, and they’re pouring across the border. (The article in question cites a report from Judicial Watch, a right-wing paranoiac crank website, saying ISIS has “spotters” in New Mexico to aid in deadly terrorist crossings.) This news didn’t surprise John Bolton at all. John Bolton is never surprised. John Bolton has seen some things.

“I’ve been reading some things about ISIL,” another older man says. He’s been reading the Internet and you just won’t believe the stuff he’s finding. ISIS is trying to establish a Caliphate and, according to the Koran, once the Caliphate is established, all Muslims are required to pledge allegiance to it and kill all non-participants. Why aren’t we stopping Islam? John Bolton is of course aware of this, and not surprised by it, and to him the fact that Barack Obama won’t even name the enemy gives the enemy enormous power.

But these two questioners were warm-up acts for the Greatest Question Ever. It came from the woman sitting next to me, the same one who had whispered to me earlier that Obama is “trying to destroy the country.” She didn’t mean this metaphorically. She had evidence — proof so ironclad that it could only have come from a weird multicolor-font chain email that old people forward to each other.

“What do you think about the War on Terror within?” She asks? Obama has been “filling the government with Muslims. He is filling the State Department with the Muslim Brotherhood.” It gets worse. This woman has also heard that Barack Obama is “amassing tanks and artillery weapons” to stage a revolution “in the streets.” He may have several four- and five-star generals who are going along with this. And then there’s the–

“The answer is no,” John Bolton cut her off, laughing nervously. She had managed to surprise John Bolton, and that’s an accomplishment.

***

“Well, you’re probably nicer to me than the conservative media,” Mike Huckabee told me, after I was introduced to him as a reporter from a liberal news outlet.

I had been watching him on Fox News from the hotel lounge, announcing that he announce his presidential decision in early May. Right after the segment aired, Mike Huckabee walked through the lounge on his way to something else. Like a moron, I pointed at the TV and said to him “YOU WERE JUST ON THE TV,” as though bewildered that someone can climb out of a television set and into real life.

Can’t say I’ve ever been very nice to Mike Huckabee, but it’s true that he’s about to go to war with conservative media. Small-government fiscal conservatives have never liked Huckabee. For all outspoken social conservatism and a foreign policy informed by fundamentalist interpretation of Revelation, he’s never been much of a budget-cutter. (He’ll claim that a lot of this had to do with the Democratic legislature he dealt with when he was governor of Arkansas.) And in the past few days, he’s been the (unofficial) presidential candidate coming out hardest against Chris Christie’s plan to cut Social Security.

He’s not framing it in liberal terms — about how means-testing Social Security would welfarize the program and erode its support — and he looked sort of confused when I tried to explain that argument. But Huckabee has a problem, as a vast majority of those affected almost certainly will, with people paying into Social Security for decades and then not getting back what’s owed them, whether those cuts come in the form of means-testing, a raise in the retirement age, or linking cost-of-living increases to chained CPI. And since he’s a professional politician who understands his audience, he’s spinning it another way: the government is stealing the money of the people. You lent the government your money, and they’re not letting you have it back. It’s Big Government Theft. That’ll do.