Topics: Campus rape, Editor's Picks, Rape, Sexual assault, sexual violence, victim blaming, Violence Against Women, Life News, Politics News

There’s a familiar script that we follow when talking about sexual violence, particularly rape on college campuses. We rehash the same facile, boring conversations about alcohol, about the “ambiguities of hookup culture,” about so-called common sense approaches to preventing sexual assault that almost always involve girls and women modifying their behavior in ways big and small. We fire back the same (necessary, but totally exhausting) critiques, we talk about rape culture and victim-blaming. We rinse. We repeat. We are stuck in an absurd, repetitive loop.

Sex education might be the thing to break it. As I’ve pointed out before, sex education in the United States is a total mess. Only 22 states and the District of Columbia require that public schools teach sex education, and only 19 of those states have laws ensuring that what’s being taught meets the minimum requirement of being medically or factually accurate. Changing this will first require that schools embrace sex education, and embrace sex educators who can speak openly and directly about the sex teens and young adults are actually having. That means going beyond talking about condoms and birth control (something that isn’t happening nearly enough as it is), and getting into consent, mutual desire and mutual pleasure.

Affirmative consent, defined broadly, is making sure that the person you want to have sex with wants to have sex with you. But just mention the words and you’re bound to hear something about Kenyon or Antioch and the madness of ’90s progressive culture, the death of romance and spontaneity or some other garbage about political correctness run amok, whatever that means. (The GOP, the party most comfortable with putting the state in your bedroom and doctor’s office, apparently draws the line at the dorm room.) The real conversation about affirmative consent is one about mutual desire, mutual pleasure and active rather than passive sexuality. Talking more before, during and after sex not only helps to ensure that all parties are on board with what’s happening, it allows people to express what feels good, what doesn’t, what’s comfortable, what isn’t.

“It’s admittedly somewhat of a departure from the way our society often approaches sex,” Tara Culp-Ressler recently wrote for ThinkProgress. “Recent studies have found that most college students feel uncomfortable voicing their desires during sexual encounters, and there’s a gender imbalance in whose pleasure is prioritized. But the emphasis on getting consent isn’t an effort to turn everyone into rapists. It’s just about encouraging better communication across the board.”

This communication is something that many teens and young adults don’t feel equipped to do right now, and that’s a problem. The lack of education about and interest in consent and communication was made frighteningly clear in a recent piece in Bloomberg News, in which a number of college men discussed how supposedly fearful they had become of sex now that the dialogue about accountability and sexual violence is being taken seriously. But rather than solving the problem with more talking, most of these young men seemed content to do even less.