What do New Yorkers think about Obamacare?

An overwhelming majority of those who became insured under health reform — 92% — said they were “completely” or “somewhat satisfied” with their health insurance, according to a survey by the New York State of Health Foundation.

The Daily News reached out to some New Yorkers who enrolled last year to learn more about their experiences. Here are their stories.

Nydia Mata, 36, freelance photographer, Chelsea

In recent years, Mata, a single mom, couldn’t afford health insurance.

When she got hit badly by the flu, she didn’t go to the doctor and was forced to send her son away until she recovered.

“It was a nightmare,” Mata said.

Last year, the photographer bought a silver plan on New York State of Health from Oscar Insurance. After subsidies, she is paying $151 a month.

“There are a lot of benefits,” Mata said. “There is a partial reimbursement for joining a gym. They send out email reminders for checkups. It’s like having a third parent.”

Will she change her plan during open enrollment?

“I will keep the same plan,” Mata said. “It’s amazingly great.”

Patricia Shih, 61, Stephen Fricker, 62, musicians, Huntington, L.I.

For this married couple, Obamacare has been a “life changer.”

Patricia Shih, 61, and Stephen Fricker, 62, both musicians in Huntington, L.I., bought insurance last year through Obamacare. (neil miller for new york daily news)

They saw their income fall precipitously after the recession hit. Paying their health insurance premiums, which cost close to $1,400 a month, had become a major burden.

Last year, Shih went shopping on New York State of Health. At first, she tried to navigate the site herself, but found the experience “daunting.”

Shih contacted the call center run by the state and ultimately purchased a silver plan from NorthShore-Long Island Jewish CareConnect.

The cost: $463 a month, after her subsidy, about one-third the price of her old plan. Her deductible is $2,000.

She will be evaluating other plans during open enrollment.

“I am definitely going to see if I can reduce our out-of-pocket costs,” Shih said.

For now, she’s grateful for Obamacare.

“I don’t know what we would have done without it,” she said. “If the Republicans have their way and repeal it, it will put us up the river.”

Warren McCann , 63, retiree, Northport, L.I.

McCann spent 33 years as an executive in the insurance industry.

But when it came to purchasing a policy of his own on New York State of Health last year, he found the experience difficult.

Warren McCann of Northport, L.I., has some advice for shopping for plans: 'Get a broker. Describe your position medically and financially.' (Christie M. Farriella for New York Daily News)

“The site left me with an enormous amount of questions,” McCann said. “Important information was not clear from the website.”

McCann signed up for a policy that at first glance looked right. But after receiving paperwork from his insurance company, McCann learned the plan was an HMO, meaning he’d be required to get approvals to see specialists.

McCann enlisted the help of Kyle Sloane, a broker with Newtek Insurance Agency.

Sloane ultimately helped McCann find a policy that better suited his needs: a Health Republic PrimarySelect platinum plan.

McCann is paying $989 a month to cover himself and his wife. There is a zero deductible. No referrals are required.

“This plan was the right plan based on the network flexibility as well as the monthly premium,” Sloane said.

Soon McCann will be going back to work again. He just learned that premiums for his plan will be rising 14.2%, to $1,130 a month.

“It’s excessive. I don’t think I can just renew without doing my homework,” McCann said.

“We have one of the broadest networks in the state with more than 70,000 doctors and more than 200 of the finest hospitals,” said Health Republic spokesperson Tara Schuh.

“In 2015, we are still one of the most affordable plans.”

Nancy Jovishoff, from Queens, says her health costs still remain high after enrolling in an exchange plan from NorthShore-Long Island Jewish CareConnect. (Marcus Santos/New York Daily News)

McCann’s advice to others during open enrollment: “Get a broker. Describe your position medically and financially. If you do it by yourself, it’s too complicated and too involved. It’s too much information to absorb.”

Nancy Jovishoff , 63, freelance market research exec, Queens

Last year, the Daily News spoke to Jovishoff soon after she enrolled in an exchange plan from NorthShore-Long Island Jewish CareConnect.

One year later, she’s feeling pretty good.

Jovishoff is paying $713 a month to cover herself and her 22-year-old son. She is not eligible for subsidies.

She’s happy that nearly all of her doctors are in the network.

Even so, her health care costs remain high.

So far this year, Jovishoff has spent $14,000, including premiums, deductibles and co-pays.

She said she is looking forward to turning 65 when she will be eligible for Medicare.

“It’s expensive,” Jovishoff said of her current plan. “But it’s much better than the alternative of going on my husband's plan.”