The state budget impasse is forcing health departments throughout Illinois to cut back on their hours and operate with skeleton staffs.

And with the future of state funding uncertain, local departments, like the one in Kendall County, are unsure how much longer they can continue providing basic services.

"At the end of all of this, when the state finally has the budget and reviews the aftermath that cannot be forecasted now, they'll see all the people who didn't get help. Or the people who stopped calling because they didn't believe they could get help," said Amaal Tokars, executive director of the Kendall County Health Department.

The Health Department has eight to 10 open positions that need to be filled but won't be without funding, she said. A hiring freeze will continue for several more months, she said.

"We're very good at budgeting, but we have a situation where the state does not have a budget," she said. "The horizon is not really, clearly viewable. It's very worrisome to us."

Kendall County is among 21 of Illinois' 97 public health departments that have laid off employees or cut back on service hours -- a number that's expected to increase until the state comes through with funding.

These agencies are responsible for everything from sexually transmitted disease treatment, restaurant inspections and disease outbreak investigations. But with slim staffing, these services can't be provided as effectively, said Miriam Link-Mullison, president of the Illinois Association of Public Health Administrators.

The health departments struggling mainly serve the state's southern counties. The East Side Health District in East St. Louis laid off 65 percent of its staff this summer. It closed its dental clinic, which served 2,000 residents, as well as its school-based clinic, which provided services to low-income pregnant women and parents with young children, Link-Mullison said.

At the Southern Seven Health Department, which serves the state's seven southernmost counties, satellite clinics are open just once a week, forcing those who need immediate assistance to drive long distances to the nearest open clinic, Link-Mullison said.

But other northern Illinois health departments also are feeling the strain of the budget impasse. The Will County Health Department announced it will lay off 20 employees in December, including 16 union employees and four managerial staff members, said department spokesman Vic Reato.

With 56 programs and about 350 employees, the Will County Health Department is among the largest in northern Illinois. It doesn't depend too heavily on state funding, Reato said. Layoffs and program cuts are also the result of an $800,000 shortfall in local funding, he said.

Funding shortages also caused the department to entirely eliminate two behavioral health programs and one family health services program.

While the department isn't entirely reliant on state funds, they "obviously play a big role," Reato said.

"I think as we go forward, we'll have a better understanding of how [the budget impasse] will affect us," he said. "So far, we've been fairly able to provide a fair level of service. But if this impasse continues for a significant amount of time, it'll be a big issue."

To further complicate things for local health departments, the state recently decided to stop providing testing of sexually transmitted infections for dozens of county health departments. State officials have said that remaining resources must be shifted toward identifying disease outbreaks and biological threats.

The state spent $10.2 million on testing for gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis and HIV specimens during the last budget year. Illinois Department of Public Health officials suggested health care providers instead hire commercial private laboratories to offer the testing, saying the science has become standardized and can be done quicker and more cheaply.

Treatment and surveillance of STDs, as well as other diseases, are among the unmatched services health departments provide for their communities, Link-Mullison said.

"A doctor probably isn't going to call your partner and other partners to make sure they get treated (for an STD). We do," she said. "We're all about preventing disease, and when we can't work to full capacity, some diseases aren't being prevented."

Other counties are fairing better – although a solution to the state budget impasse would put minds at ease.

Kane and DuPage counties both report that they've continued providing their regular public health services. The Kane County Health Department receives only a small portion of funding from the state, so the budget impasse hasn't caused a significant problem, said Tom Schlueter, health communications coordinator.

Dave Hass, public information officer for DuPage County's Health Department, said officials have been preparing for tighter budgets for more than five years and have maintained the necessary funding for their operations.

"Other local health departments have not been as fortunate. We share the concerns that this will have an impact on the health of all Illinois residents," Hass said in an emailed statement. "These are clearly unprecedented times, and our hope is that this current stalemate can be resolved."

meltagouri@tribune.com

Twitter: @marwaeltagouri