It's your chance to celebrate romance in your own weird way

Aimee Heckel's husband, JD, gleefully yet stoically uses his drinking horn, which sure beats champagne glasses on Valentine's Day. ( Aimee Heckel / Camera Staff )

Aimee Heckel The Boulder and the Beautiful

Local & unusual Looking for some other unusual finds with local ties? I wasted most of my day scouring Etsy, and I don't regret it. Here are my three favorite scores: Wearable goat horns: If you don't want to drink out of a horn but still want to indulge in one, Boulder-based shop RavenKingRelics sells horns made of lightweight but rigid foam, $26. You also can find large ram horns, if that's more of your horned-beast style. Honey badger hat: Perfect for people who don't want to wear a skunk hat and also want to show the world they don't give any (naughty words), this Boulder-made winter beanie is crocheted to look like a black and white honey badger; $33.75, AJsHooks.etsy.com. Sriracha Sea Salt: Move one step closer to making Sriracha an essential component of every meal with Sriracha Sea Salt, $7.25 from Boulder's BespokeSalt.etsy.com. I can't think of anything this wouldn't work on. Taffy? Dark chocolate? On the rim of a drinking horn? All checks. Valisblot Day just got hotter.

I don't do Valentine's Day, much to my husband's relief.

I don't do flowers. I don't think it is romantic to put a beautiful thing on display to watch it slowly die.

I only like dark chocolate, like 99 percent cacao, which my husband thinks tastes like potting soil, so we can't lovingly share a box of chocolates without also sharing dry heaves.

Advertisement

Despite my obsession with jewelry, I prefer to pick it out myself, rather than receive it as a gift; this is thanks to a boyfriend in high school who tried to use gifts of jewelry to distract me from how very much he sucked as a person. Now, if you give me a necklace, I reflexively wonder who you made out with behind my back.

Maybe I'm too jaded for V-Day, or maybe it's a protest against consumption-centric romance, or maybe I'm still exhausted from Christmas (hint: it's mostly the latter), but this Valentine's Day, instead of flowers and chocolate and jewelry, my lover and I shall sip ale from the Viking-style drinking horns that we procured on a recent Un-Valentine's Day trip to Estes Park. A tribute to Valisblot.

That's my style of romance.

Giant, impractical horns that emit a notable bovine odor whence filled with booze. Swoon.

We recently went to Estes to go snowshoeing, but mostly to stock up on saltwater taffy and wolf paraphernalia, when we stumbled upon the most unusual shop: Phoenix Nest, in the Old Church Shops in downtown.

What caught my eye was a rack of fox tails that you can tie on to your belt loop to look as if you have a real tail.

Then, I spotted a skunk-fur cap. Then, several displays of chain mail and knight's armor. Round-rimmed glasses and goggles, top hats punctuated by feather plumes, Victorian-style blouses, a small metal octopus to wear on your ear (made by an artist named Marty Magic). Drinking horns. A full case of carved, bovine horns designed to transport liquid into your mouth hole with an ancient flair

The shop was like the best of steampunk blended with the Renaissance Festival dipped in a craft fair with a sprinkle of museum exhibit baked inside Halloween, but better.

We obviously bought everything.

That night, we stayed up late in our cabin with the fireplace roaring, toasting our horns while wearing feathers and snowshoes (yes, inside) and laughing until, well, until like 9 p.m., because gosh, I'm getting old, guys, what do you think?

Yes, it was silly, but it was us. Our own expression of our weird love that wasn't assigned by society to look a certain way on a certain day.

No, we aren't celebrating Valentine's Day today. But that's because we already have, many different times and ways throughout the year. I'm not anti-Valentine's Day, if it feels authentic and important to you. But it doesn't do anything for me.

As for today's Norse holiday, Valisblot? Yeah, we'll be raising our pointy glasses, and I may or may not wear a fox tail for the occasion.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay