I'm Davan Maharaj, editor of the Los Angeles Times. Here are some story lines I don't want you to miss today.

TOP STORIES

More Name-Calling

Baby. Weak. Loser. Not very bright. With the Republican race tightening in Ohio, Donald Trump has dispensed with “Little Marco” Rubio and “Lyin’ Ted” Cruz and is now turning on rival John Kasich. “You people have a lot of problems,” Trump told an audience in a Cincinnati suburb. Kasich is reciprocating through a PAC accusing Trump of “bald-faced unhinged lies.”

Donald Trump John Minchillo / Associated Press Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks alongside a member of the Secret Service during a campaign stop on March 13 in West Chester, Ohio. Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump speaks alongside a member of the Secret Service during a campaign stop on March 13 in West Chester, Ohio. (John Minchillo / Associated Press) (John Minchillo / Associated Press)

Retreat From Syria

Less than six months after Russian war planes began bombarding forces arrayed against the Syrian government, Vladimir Putin has ordered the withdrawal of troops from the country. Russian troops and warplanes began leaving Tuesday. U.S. intelligence officials are trying to interpret the announcement. Will it force President Bashar Assad to step down?

Movable Feasts

The mauling of an endangered koala at the Los Angeles Zoo, presumably by the mountain lion P22, is just one in series of attacks by the marauding cats. Sheep, an alpaca and possibly even a young child are recent victims, raising concerns about public safety especially in the Santa Monica Mountains. “We don’t go hiking in the moonlight anymore,” said one resident.

Future Shock

It is easy to understand how the world’s island nations — the Maldives, Vanuatu — will be threatened by rising sea levels, but California? A new study reports that nearly a million residents in the state and as many as 13.1 million in the United States could face flooding by the end of the century if protective measures are not taken. “We’ve been underestimating what those potential impacts could be,” said one researcher.

CALIFORNIA

— Judge Paul J. Watford, who was born and raised in Orange County, makes the shortlist of candidates that President Obama is considering for the Supreme Court.

— Claims of sexual harassment continue to roil the University of California system. An assistant basketball coach is the third faculty member at UC Berkeley to be relieved of responsibilities.

— The 2018 California governor’s race may seem too far in the future to warrant notice. But consultants and pundits have already begun handicapping the favorites. Your guide: From Eric Garcetti to Ashley Swearengin.

— If the March Miracle continues, both Lake Shasta and Lake Orville — poster children for the state’s punishing drought — could fill to the brim by mid-April.

NATION-WORLD

— As if the conclusion isn’t bad enough — corrupt border agents “pose a national security threat,” according a report commissioned by the homeland security advisory council — procedures for rooting out that corruption are worse.

— After losing the first three matches to a computer, Lee Sedol saw a weakness in the computer program and defeated Alpha Go at the game of Go. The fifth and final match is scheduled for today.

— The purchase by a Chinese insurance company of the Hotel del Coronado near San Diego and the Loews Santa Monica Beach Hotel for $6.5 billion is part of the recent surge of Chinese companies seeking to exploit a surge of Chinese tourism in the U.S.

— “Too many of our citizens are simply in jail because they don’t have the money to get out,” said Atty. Gen. Loretta Lynch. The Justice Department has set aside $2.5 million to help fight this trend.

— Could Donald Trump face charges for inciting a riot after one of his supporters hit a protester at a rally last week? Investigators in North Carolina are looking into it.

HOLLYWOOD AND THE ARTS

— The choice of Michelle Obama as the keynote speaker at this year's South by Southwest leaves some critics wondering if the once brilliant, sometimes unruly music festival is having an identity crisis.

— “Madame Butterfly” has once again alit at the Music Center. Of all the sad and exquisite Lepidoptera, this one is decent if not innovative. Still, Mark Swed wonders, isn't it time to call the exterminator and end this Puccini-fest?