The Confection | A Goodie That's an Oldie

ENLARGE Caramel-smothered marshmallows from Littlejohn's Candies F. Martin Ramin/The Wall Street Journal, Styling by Anne Cardenas

What's the best way to dress up a marshmallow? Smother it in caramel, of course. That's how they've been doing things at Littlejohn's Candies, L.A.'s premier old-fashioned sweets shop, since 1924, and at their newer location in San Francisco. Littlejohn's Marshmallow Delights are made just as they always have been: The sweet, white puffs are tossed in a kettle of molten caramel then fished out, left to cool on a marble slab and hand-wrapped in cellophane. Just one of these gooey treats makes a satisfying mouthful. But with vanilla, chocolate and salted vanilla flavors to choose from, you'll want to get a bunch. From $12 for a half-pound box, littlejohnscandies.com

The Meat | Steak à Deux

ENLARGE DeBragga dry-aged steakhouse rib chops

This Valentine's Day, take a less traditional approach to showing you care with a naturally raised, dry-aged, 32-ounce Frenched rib chop for two from DeBragga, specialty meat purveyor to some of New York's top restaurants. The beef comes from cows that are raised without antibiotics or hormones, graze on grass and then transition to a grain-based diet that results in flesh thoroughly marbled with delectable fat. Over 40 to 45 days of aging, the meat loses moisture, making for a more concentrated flavor. In the opinion of DeBragga co-owner Marc Sarrazin, the best way to do justice to such a lovingly produced cut is to grill it. But a good indoor alternative is to sear the steak in a cast-iron pan and then finish it in the oven, for a tender chop with a good steakhouse char. From $88 for one 32-ounce rib chop, debragga.com

The Spreads | Cookie Dough, Meet the Competition

ENLARGE Tumbador Chocolate spreads F. Martin Ramin/The Wall Street Journal

Combine the satiny, spreadable texture of Nutella and the sweet, toasty flavor of a fresh-baked cookie, and you have the new line of spreads from Brooklyn-based Tumbador Chocolate. Pastry chef and co-owner Jean-François Bonnet was inspired by Belgian speculoos spread, a popular cookie butter made by pulverizing spice cookies and vegetable oil into a smooth paste. Mr. Bonnet's version is, in his words, "an American twist," in honey graham cracker, vanilla snickerdoodle and chocolate cookies-and-cream flavors. Serve any of these as a sweet dip for fruit, add them to milk shakes or heat them up to make a luscious fondue. $10 for a 7.5-ounce jar, tumbadorchocolate.com