Boulder County’s grocery shopping options swelled in recent months.

As Trader Joe’s and Walmart entered the market, the homegrown Alfalfa’s and Lucky’s expanded with new stores in the northern and eastern parts of the county.

But the feeding frenzy for grocery dollars in Boulder and elsewhere is not confined within brick-and-mortar walls. Online outlets — ranging from locals such as Door to Door Organics and Mile High Organics to multinational giants Amazon.com and Walmart -— are taking bigger bites of the industry pie.

Door to Door Organics and Mile High Organics, which have recorded double-digit sales increases, are eyeing new regions and product lines, respectively.

Walmart appears poised to throw its weight behind grocery delivery if pilot programs -— such as one currently taking place in Denver — prove successful.

And Amazon.com is digging deeper with its AmazonFresh experiment by expanding outside its hometown of Seattle to test the waters of San Francisco, Los Angeles and, reportedly, 20 more markets in 2014.

How those and other firms execute on their initiatives this year not only could have ripple effects on the brick-and-mortar grocers, but also could set the stage for what the online model becomes in the future, industry members and analysts say.

The “over-stored” issue — where the pure amount of retail square footage is too great for the population size — is happening in virtually every region, said Bill Bishop, founder and chief architect of Brick Meets Click, a retail consulting firm based in Barrington, Ill.

“It’s complicated, because when you have someone like Trader Joe’s or Sprouts (Farmers Market) appear, they’re different enough,” he said. “There’s a question about how the shopper regards the store — as a primary place or a secondary place to shop.

“This works particularly to the advantage of the traditional supermarket.”

That being said, the crowding of the market also has created a situation where retail grocery sales are, at best, “sluggish” at the individual store level, he said.

“You add the online option to the mix, so it’s just one more way to divert a purchase,” he said.

At the close of 2013, the online sector had a 3.3 percent share of total grocery dollars, according to Brick Meets Click research.

Ten years from now, that market share could range from 6.7 percent on the conservative side to 16.9 percent on the aggressive side, the report showed.

The conservative growth model consists of market conditions where the only online grocery option was a new player that invested in a fulfillment center and took a measured approach to expansion. The aggressive model includes market conditions where “major disruption” has occurred as AmazonFresh increases its markets and national and regional chains respond.

Online grocery shopping currently is growing in two dimensions, Bishop said. The first is that customers are seeking a special item they can’t find at stores anymore; then there is the specialty option — upscale appeal, organic appeal, natural appeal and culinary appeal.

“We’re seeing (companies) like Door to Door Organics, (San Francisco-based) Good Eggs, (Virginia-based) Relay (and others) … establish some degree of prominence,” he said.

According to IBISWorld, online grocery is a $6 billion business and is expected to reach nearly $9.5 billion in 2017.

‘Food as a lifestyle’

The privately held Door to Door Organics finished last year with $26 million in revenue, a more than 60 percent increase from the $16 million recorded in 2012, said Chad Arnold, president and chief executive officer.

That growth came from Door to Door’s five existing markets that include Colorado, Chicago, Michigan, Kansas City and Pennsylvania and reach into nine states, he said.

“That’s all same-market growth,” Arnold said. “We haven’t expanded into any new significant (geographic areas)” in the past year.

Door to Door also benefitted from a broader, national focus on health and the relationships between food, culture and society, Arnold said, noting his company tailored its offerings to include recipes and meal-planning assistance.

“We really want to support food as a lifestyle,” he said. “We really want to help people add value to planning, help them think more about how they’re cooking for their health.

” … We want to connect that lifestyle experience to that shopping experience.”

The arrival of grocery retailers such as Trader Joe’s should have minimal effects on Door to Door’s business. When those retailers start offering delivery, the impacts could be greater, he said.

“The Walmart delivery piece, I absolutely think that we’ll overlap with them somewhere down the road,” he said, noting that Door to Door is differentiated because of its customer base. “…When we look at our customers in the wheel of all the different places they shop, Walmart makes the list, but it’s not in the top five, that’s for sure.”

Door to Door’s near-term goals involve building awareness for the concept, integrating back-end technology and operations, expanding the product selection and then expanding geographically.

If all goes according to plan, Door to Door could add another three states this year.

To fuel those initiatives, Door to Door is raising a B round of capital of about $14 million. Arnold expressed confidence in that endeavor, adding that he’s noticed that investors are looking more favorably upon e-commerce food businesses.

“I think that there’s a level of innovation occurring now that capital is starting to flow into food and technology,” he said.

Going for premium

Boulder’s Mile High Organics appears to be a competitor to Door to Door Organics, but that’s not how founder and CEO Michael Joseph sees it.

Mile High Organics is going after natural grocery industry leader Whole Foods, he said.

“We’re really going for the premium grocery dollars,” he said.

At the end of December, Mile High Organics built an on-site kitchen at its Denver warehouse. By the end of January, the company had launched a prepared foods line that included salads, cheeses and beverages such as made-to-order almond milk.

“Those have been all nice drivers of growth,” Joseph said, noting his company is adding more items from the Mile High Organics kitchen on a weekly basis.

As of last week, Mile High Organics has about 130 stock keeping units of its prepared items. About 90 of those are bulk goods. In total, Mile High Organics has about 3,500 SKUs.

By supplementing its line of organic, locally sourced and genetically modified organism-free items with made-to-order foods, Mile High Organics should be able carve a deeper niche for itself within the borders of Colorado, Joseph said.

“We believe this business can scale to multiple geographies, but it’s just not our focus right now,” he said.

The 50-employee company’s delivery reach stretches from Pueblo north to Fort Collins. It covers most of Colorado’s Front Range and goes as far west as Eagle.

Something that could help Mile High Organics’ growth would be the arrival of AmazonFresh and Walmart.

“We’re highly specialized,” he said, noting that the presence of other online grocers would bring a “grander awareness” to the segment.

Testing the waters

Traditional grocers haven’t made much more than cursory efforts into the delivery business. Brick Meets Click’s Bishop attributes this to profits and sourcing.

“It really isn’t as profitable as their current business, so there’s a feeling afoot of, ‘Let’s keep our business as profitable as it can be and, when we have to, we’ll move quickly,'” he said. “I think that’s a risky endeavor.”

Walmart, alternatively, is testing the waters with grocery delivery. Whether the discount giant ultimately moves forward with expanding those efforts remains to be seen, he said.

“They’re not going to allow themselves to fall behind without a tremendous effort,” Bishop said.

Aggregating the products and getting those products to the customer are all logistical challenges. Some companies have gone the warehouse model while others, notably yummy.com, have built distribution centers that also are used as stores.

“You’re finding people skinning the cat differently,” Bishop said. “Clearly getting the product to the customer is a big deal.”

The aggregation and delivery do come at a higher cost, but some firms have found customers willing to pay.

“I think these more specialized online grocery shopping enterprises have very cleverly entered the online grocery market at the upper level so that the economics of their businesses are more easily worked out for their shoppers and for themselves,” he said.

Bishop believes AmazonFresh may follow that strategy as well.

Amazon.com likely will target its AmazonFresh to the top 10 percent to 15 percent of earners and work to perfect the concept. Once that occurs, Amazon.com likely would bring it down to the top 30 percent to 40 percent.

“I think there have been bumps along the way for them in the consumer acceptance site of it,” Bishop said.

AmazonFresh adopted an annual subscription approach that has been difficult for “people to get their minds around.”

AmazonFresh could find success thanks to some of its executives hailing from of the highest profile failures in the online grocery business: Webvan.

After rising to prominence in the dot-com boom in the late 1990s, Webvan’s online grocery business faltered as the firm made substantial investments in a fulfillment center, but couldn’t turn a profit.

“It was proven, the market was there in 2000 with Webvan,” Bishopsaid. “It wasn’t the shoppers that failed Webvan, it was Webvan that failed the shoppers.”

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com