PR Web

Northbrook, IL. (PRWEB) August 17, 2014

With more than 30 total years experience in healthcare and technology development, the executives of PracticeCompass knew that there must be a better way for dentists to manage all aspects of their business. What they developed is quickly becoming a leader in practice marketing and management by offering a simple practice administration app that integrates with existing practice management software to help it function more smoothly in one, consolidated space.

"As a doctor myself, I know the frustrations of trying to run a practice while attending to the needs of the patients," says Dr. Yan Katsnelson , M.D., founder of PracticeCompass. "Too many dental offices are wasting so much time organizing the business side of their operation with scheduling, cancellations, marketing, and every other aspect that takes time away from simply serving their patients. And that's the main reason PracticeCompass exists: to give dental practice managers a tool that gives them more productivity with less wasted time and less stress."

Practice management software is not a new concept, and many dental offices have already found the value in trying to consolidate their non-patient efforts. Often, practices' management and business tools are costly investments that must be managed separately. But, according the founder, what PracticeCompass offers is something unique: the application is an all-encompassing umbrella that unites phone systems and service, patient relationship management, schedule tracking and multi-channel confirmation, tracking of online and offline marketing campaigns and the ability to segregate new and established customers, staff resources management via task assignment intelligence, and reporting and tracking key performance indicators (including completeness of data and more, all the way to dropped calls).

As technology is increasingly making business faster, it can also often make its management more complicated. And, as more and more dentists and practice managers are learning, even the newest technology might give a poor return on investment if the time and effort poured into it is too separated from the rest of their practice. The executive team at PracticeCompass has truly thought about the value of time spent on patient-acquisition, staff performance, marketing ROI and the like. What they have found, and what many dentists are already experiencing for themselves, is that the PracticeCompass simplifies and streamlines every part of the workflow from beginning to end and incorporates intelligent and efficient design into the connections between patients, advertisement vendors, media sources, telecom carriers, interactive channels, dental treatment providers, and insurance and billing companies.

Dr. Katsnelson sums up their effort as, "We're building the software to take dental business to the next level."

PracticeCompass is a productivity-improvement software company specializing in cutting-edge patient acquisition and retention technology, phone over the internet services, and integrated software that automates time-consuming administrative office work. More information about PracticeCompass and their practice administration apps are available at: http://www.practicecompass.com.

Follow Us on Twitter

Like Us on Facebook

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/practicecompass/pr1/prweb12099915.htm