Truancy court: Parents get support, kids get to school

In the past two years, the parents of 30 Alameda County children were dragged into Superior Court and charged with violating state truancy laws.

Their children had missed weeks and weeks of school; in some cases, they had been absent nearly every day.

None of the typical interventions worked - meetings with teachers or principals, phone calls home, threats by the district. The parents, a summons in hand, stood often in fear before Judge Gloria Rhynes, a no-nonsense jurist who most days of the week metes out justice to murderers and other felons.

But truancy court is different. It's not about punishing parents. It's about helping them.

"Certainly, I have to follow the guidelines of the law," she said. "But I see myself as an encourager."

On Friday, that encouragement paid off as Rhynes acknowledged the much improved attendance of all the students and then dismissed the criminal case against their parents.

"I came to the courtroom expecting the worst," said single mom Adrian Allen. "It was totally different."

Prosecuting parents for violating the state Education Code is a last resort and used in only the most difficult cases, Assistant District Attorney Teresa Drenick said.

In the past 10 years, 740 parents have been prosecuted and charged with truancy infractions and 85 to 90 percent of their 1,000 children have shown improved attendance.

"I think it is a combination of the power of a courtroom and the justice system coupled with the assistance that's provided through all of the case management and health care providers plus the fact the parents are mandated to come back to court on a regular basis," she said. "What it shows is that the justice system, over and above everything else, is powerful and doesn't necessarily need to be punitive."

'Overwhelmed with life'

By far the biggest reason kids are chronically absent from school is that the parents are "overwhelmed with life," Drenick said.

Getting their kids up and out the door to school becomes secondary to other struggles.

There are often health issues, transportation problems, homelessness and family turmoil.

The program has increased the kinds of support offered to families over the past decade, with home visits by nurses now included as well as help registering for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

"That's one of the things that this court takes away is the ability to have an excuse," Drenick said. "Yeah, we get this is a really big problem in your life, but it can't stop you from getting your child to school."

Allen and her son, Isaiah, moved to Oakland from Modesto and the transition was hard.

Isaiah struggled to make friends and keep up academically.

"I was keeping him home because he was making himself physically sick," Allen said. "He was shutting down."

And then, after a house fire, they were homeless for a time.

Through the Alameda County district attorney's truancy program, a social worker was assigned to the family, helping guide Allen and her son through the troubles.

'Totally the opposite'

That wasn't what Allen expected when she was charged and brought to court.

She thought it would be sterile and punitive.

"It was totally the opposite," she said. "It worked out extremely beyond what I expected."

The now-14-year-old had much better attendance this last school year.

For so many families, there had been a complete shift since their first court appearance and their last one on Friday, Rhynes said.

"These parents are parents who always loved their children. That's not the problem," she said in her chambers before the celebratory hearing. "But love is not just a feeling."

It's also about doing what's best for your child and that includes prioritizing an education, the judge said.

Just after 9 a.m., Rhynes asked for the first case of the day. Carlos Medina approached the bench with his 9-year-old daughter, Chloe.

"What a difference a year makes," Drenick said, as she made a motion for the judge to dismiss the case against Medina and his wife.

In the previous two years, Chloe had missed whole weeks of school and many days in between.

Her parents, who worked long hours, hadn't prioritized school given that Chloe was advanced academically.

With support from case workers and after several appearances before the judge, the family shifted priorities and Chloe recorded perfect attendance last year.

"I'll miss you, judge," Chloe said softly as she stood before Rhynes with her father.

The judge smiled.

"Where is my banger thing?" Rhynes said before grabbing her gavel and giving it a good whack on her bench. "Case dismissed."