Henry Ford may sell Medicaid assets after state protest fails Sparrow PHP could transfer membership, lay off employees

The health insurance arm of Detroit-based Henry Ford Health System may divest a large portion of its profitable Medicaid plan after Michigan health officials decided to reject the Detroit-based system's protest of newly awarded managed-care contracts.



HAP Midwest Health Plan, a subsidiary of Henry Ford's Health Alliance Plan, “intends on selling its Medicaid membership for affected regions to another health plan” if the state does not reverse its decision, the system said in a financial disclosure this week. The State Administrative Board met Tuesday and denied Henry Ford's appeal.

Wright Lassiter III, Henry Ford's president, told Crain's on Wednesday that the health care system has hired a law firm to explore possible legal challenges. He said a decision on filing a lawsuit against the state or transferring membership to another plan needs to be made in 48-72 hours.

"There is talk internally: Is there a reasonable pathway for a legal challenge given how the process was structured by the state?" said Lassiter, adding: "The notification of members is next week. The state’s process handcuffs us. If we don’t affirmatively take steps to transfer members, it will be done for us" through auto enrollment.

Sparrow PHP CEO Dennis Reese told Crain's that the 21,000-member Medicaid health plan could be forced to lay off employees if the state doesn't reverse course by next week. The Lansing State Journal reported 40 employees could be laid off. Reese said there are some openings in other parts of the organization, which also operates a 60,000-member commercial HMO.

Reese said Sparrow PHP, which is owned by Lansing-based Sparrow Health System, has also made arrangements to transfer its membership to one of the successful Medicaid HMO bidders in its region. He declined to name the plan.

"We need to communicate with members early next week who that is," Reese said. "We are concerned about our members. If the state makes this mistake we don’t want to harm the members (and create as) little disruption of possible" to their medical care.

Reese also said the loss of Sparrow PHP's contract will cost the health system $9 million and cause ripple effects throughout the organization. Sparrow Health System earned $12.8 million in net income on revenue of $$1.14 billion in 2014.

In October, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, which administers the Medicaid program for the state's 1.7 million poor residents, announced the winners of the $42 billion program. Each insurer is paid a monthly capitated amount to care for Medicaid beneficiaries in designated areas. HAP Midwest retained one contract covering 1,000 patients but lost its Medicaid contracts in the two populous regions surrounding Detroit.

HAP Midwest covers 88,000 Medicaid patients in those two regions, a vast majority of the plan's membership. Executives immediately filed a protest after the decision, which was denied.



The health plan asked for a reconsideration of its protest soon after, which was turned down Tuesday. The decision is a huge financial blow to the system. In the first nine months of 2015, HAP Midwest posted a $20.1 million surplus, representing about a fifth of Henry Ford's overall $104 million surplus, according to Henry Ford's unaudited statement.



“We are extremely disappointed in the state's decision,” Lassiter said in a statement. “We believe this is a huge disservice to the 88,000 HAP Midwest members whose health care will soon be disrupted with no substantial reason. HAP Midwest has had an exemplary record of service to its members for the last 35 years. We are considering every available option because we remain committed to serving this population.”



Multiple health plans have signaled interest in buying HAP Midwest's Medicaid business, but Lassiter said the system could not disclose the names because of confidentiality agreements.

However, eight Medicaid HMOs were approved for Region 10, or Southeast Michigan. The plans are Aetna Better Health of Michigan, Blue Cross Complete of Michigan, Harbor Health Plan, McLaren Health Plan, Meridian Health Plan of Michigan, Molina Healthcare of Michigan, Total Health Care and UnitedHealthcare Community Plan.

Michigan's Medicaid program has been run by managed-care companies since the 1990s. When the state expanded Medicaid to thousands of other low-income residents under the Affordable Care Act, it became that much more attractive to new and incumbent companies, said Marianne Udow-Phillips, director of the Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation at the University of Michigan.



Related Links