Where is District 3? District 3 is made up of most of Las Vegas’ southern and western suburbs, including Summerlin, Henderson and Boulder City. It stretches south to Nevada’s border with California and Arizona. Voter registration is almost evenly split between Democrats and Republicans, making it one of the last remaining swing districts represented by the 435-member U.S. House of Representatives.

Voters in suburban Las Vegas may not realize it, but they make up one of most competitive congressional districts in the country. And this fall, they will decide if they want to keep their Republican representative in Congress or elect someone else.

Rep. Joe Heck, vying for his third term, faces Democrat Erin Bilbray and three third-party candidates in Nevada’s 3rd Congressional District. Here’s what you need to know about the race.

Why is the district so competitive?

Voter registration is just about even among Democrats and Republicans. State officials redrew the district in 2011, and even before then, it bounced between Republican and Democratic representation in Congress.

The district is a notable exception to the national trend, where congressional districts are becoming less and less competitive every time states redraw their Congressional district boundaries.

Since coming to office in 2011, Heck has had to run a fierce campaign every two years as Democrats try their best to unseat him.

What’s been the biggest news of the race?

Heck has had to defend his positions on immigration, and Bilbray has had trouble with her campaign.

Even though Heck has called for immigration reform and drafted a bill to provide a path to citizenship for some young immigrants, Democrats are trying to tie him to House Republican leaders who won’t bring up reform bills for a vote.

As for Bilbray, she started her campaign in July 2013 with endorsements from Nevada and Washington political leaders, and Vice President Joe Biden came to Las Vegas to support her. But her campaign sputtered, and party leaders now consider her a long shot to beat Heck. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, who runs Nevada’s Democratic machine, said in August: “It hasn’t been a great campaign.” National nonpartisan political analysts changed the district’s rating from competitive to leaning Republican.

Bilbray’s team says she is focused on local support and not concerned with Washington pundits.

Who else is running?

The third-party candidates are Independent David Goossen of Boulder City, Libertarian Randy Kimmick of Henderson and Steven St. John of Henderson running under “other.” None has collected the support or money needed to seriously challenge Heck.