It's an advantage to have money — particularly if you have boatloads of it and want to get the right Supreme Court justices elected to shore up your mission.

Anyone paying even nominal attention knew how the state Supreme Court was going to rule on the John Doe investigation of Gov. Scott Walker's campaign. By a 4-2 vote last week, the court quashed the investigation.

Justices in the majority were the beneficiaries of millions of dollars in support from outside groups named in the investigation they were evaluating. Because of that past support, the special prosecutor in the John Doe case had asked two of them — Michael Gableman and David Prosser — to recuse themselves from the case. They refused.

The investigation sought to determine whether the Walker campaign illegally coordinated with outside groups during the governor's recall election in 2012. The investigation had been stalled for the last 18 months "after a lower court judge determined no laws were violated even if Walker's campaign and the groups had worked together as prosecutors believe," according to the Journal Sentinel report.

Gableman, writing for the majority, determined that collaboration between issue groups and campaigns was not illegal, and ordered all evidence collected during the investigation must be returned, and any copies made by prosecutors should be destroyed. He even went so far as to call the people fighting the investigation "brave." It must be easy to be brave when you've got millions of dollars and powerful interests backing your cause.

What compelled the parties involved to be so courageous as to funnel millions of dollars into getting sympathetic justices elected? It might have something to do with the millions more spent by such outside groups to help Gov. Scott Walker survive the recall election.

Wisconsin Club for Growth is estimated to have spent $507,000 for Gableman and $520,000 for Prosser. Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce spent an estimated $1.8 million for Gableman and $1.1 million for Prosser. An additional $985,000 was spent by Citizens for a Strong America, which is entirely funded by Wisconsin Club for Growth, to help Prosser.

It's worth noting that WMC was behind passage of a rule in 2009 that allows Supreme Court justices to remain on cases involving groups that spent on their behalf in elections.

This particular John Doe was described by prosecutors as an investigation into what they believed to be "an extensive 'criminal scheme' to bypass state election laws by Walker, his campaign and two top Republican political operatives — R.J. Johnson and Deborah Jordahl — associated with Club for Growth. It sprung from an earlier John Doe probe in which six people connected with Walker, including high-ranking staff members in his Milwaukee County executive office, were convicted of crimes ranging from theft from a veterans group to misconduct in office. Though he refused to disclose the donors to the fund, Walker spent $650,000 on legal fees to defend against the investigation.

I balk at calling the four justices in the majority "conservative," as issues of campaign finance law and judicial ethics should have nothing to do with political ideology and should be, rather, fundamental to the logistical underpinnings of a democracy. The behavior of these self-serving justices will help fuel the move toward corporatocracy.

Even the nonpartisan Government Accountability Board released a terse statement in reaction to the decision, affirming that it would cooperate with it while also highlighting that the decision represents a full reversal of Wisconsin's campaign finance law, which has been followed by the state Elections Board and the GAB since a U.S. Supreme Court decision in 1976, as well as a supporting decision in 1999.

The GAB has called for a comprehensive review and revision of Wisconsin's campaign finance law, with the establishment of a Legislative Council study committee. That's a good place to start. Public financing for campaigns, with a cap on total spending allowed, also would go a long way toward fixing a broken system. Candidates should win elections based on their credentials and a legitimate public vote — not on how much money they can raise. Otherwise, we end up with corporate-owned public officials who have only the best interests of themselves and the wealthy in mind.

It's a self-perpetuating cycle, and it's time to break the cycle. Justice bought is justice denied.

Emily Mills is a freelance writer who lives in Madison. Twitter: @millbot; Email: emily.mills@outlook.com