Topics: 2014 elections, Democrats, DSCC, Editor's Picks, Harry Reid, larry pressler, Mike Rounds, rick weiland, Senate, south dakota, Tom Daschle, Politics News

Late last month, The Hill reported on a feud between Harry Reid and the DSCC on one side and former South Dakota Senate majority leader Tom Daschle on the other. Daschle has been furious that Reid has refused to endorse, and the Democratic party has barely spent a dime on, the campaign of Democratic Senate candidate Rick Weiland. (We’re not sure that an endorsement-endorsement from Harry Reid would help any Democratic Senate candidate, but a tacit nod towards the party’s money apparatus to support someone sure would.) It goes back to candidate recruitment last year, when Reid and the party wanted former Rep. Stephanie Herseth Sandlin to run. She chose not to, but Rick Weiland stayed in. Since then, the help Weiland’s been getting from the party has been… [crickets].

The story was easy to dismiss, even a couple of weeks ago, because who cared about Harry Reid and Tom Daschle fighting over some lost Senate race? Now we know, though, that the race is hardly lost. It’s a three-person race between Republican Mike Rounds, independent (and former Republican Senator) Larry Pressler, and Weiland. A well-publicized poll last week showed Rounds leading Pressler by a modest 3 percentage points, and Weiland by 7. The numbers are close enough that the DSCC is putting $1 million into the race — not to support either Pressler or Weiland, but to attack Rounds.

Pressler, the Republican-turned-independent, is the closest to Rounds in current polling and thus presents the best shot to knock the Republican off. Or maybe he did present the best shot.

Politico wrote up some opposition research on Pressler late last week that showed Pressler’s principle residence is in Washington, D.C. One of the things we’ve learned from races like, say, Kansas Senate, is that revelations about candidates not *actually* living in the states where they’re running can be damaging. You could argue that these attacks are Very Silly — you don’t need to sit on the recliner in some house in Kansas or South Dakota all the time in order to know how to represent a state’s interests in Washington D.C. — but they do work.

Suppose this news hurts Pressler. Then that offers Weiland a chance to grow. If Weiland were to become the predominant challenger to Rounds, that would make things easier for the Democratic party — instead of hoping that some independent (who was a Republican until like five seconds ago) wins and chooses to caucus with the Democrats, a real-life Democrat could be the one to save Tim Johnson’s seat.