Welcome to the Daily Buzz, a quick and pithy rundown of the stories people are talking about:

Sasquatch sighted in Bradford, Pa.: Is the shocking video real?

A 57-year-old hiker named John Stoneman claims to have come face to face with not one, but two, Sasquatch specimens in Bradford, Pa., while at the Kinzua State Park.

And he has the photos and video to prove it. Stoneman says he saw the two big hairy beasts while driving during the day with his girlfriend. He slowed down and managed to snap off a few photos of the two Sasquatches. And he just might have some of the clearest images of big-foot on the web.

Decide for yourself here.

PS: No word if Stoneman was munching on beef jerky at the time, a la those “Messin' with Sasquatch” Jack Link's commercials.

Giant killer bees leave at least 19 dead in China: See to believe



They are two inches long, angry and they can sting you as many times as they like. Oh yeah, and they pack a venomous punch that can be deadly. But you have to see these pictures to really appreciate the terror of these killer hornets that are haunting Asia.

You've got to check them out here.

Lady Gaga sings praises of Obamacare on Twitter

Lady Gaga is better known for her Top 40 tunes, her theatrical concerts and her wild wardrobe. But hours ago on Twitter, she is taking on the subject of Obamacare, and she is calling on her 40 million followers to get covered.

Check out the pose Gaga strikes in her Twitter picture to get her #getcovered message out. We have it right here.

Pirates fans are jumping off bridges in Pittsburgh over team’s playoff run

So this is what happens after a 21-year losing streak is finally broken by a Cinderella season and a playoff push that could extend deep into October: Pirates fans are plunging off the Roberto Clemente Bridge near PNC Park.

Well, at least one Pirates fan did. Check out video of the perilous plunge here and hear what Pittsburgh Police had to say about it.

And as the Pirates prepare to face the St. Louis Cardinals later today in the division series, relive the magic moments from Tuesday’s Wild Card win.



We have the final out, the triumphant fireworks and the clubhouse champagne showers right here.

Look for more buzz-worthy stories every weekday mornings beginning at 7 a.m. on PennLive, along with our Daily Buzz round-up at noon.