Radical community organizers and illegal aliens are stepping up their in-your-face campaign against the nation's immigration laws by illegally using physical force to prevent federal officials from carrying out lawful deportations.

Given that illegal immigrants got here by breaking the law, their continued lawbreaking activity shouldn't be all that surprising. It certainly doesn't bother President Obama, who won't do anything about these abusive protests because he agrees with the activists.

In recent weeks activists across America complaining about high deportation rates have used chains and pipes to bind themselves to the tires of buses that transport illegals slated for deportation to court. They have also snarled traffic on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., and blocked the entrance to a federal detention center.

In Tucson, Ariz., they surrounded local police who stopped two illegals. A hundred police officers were dispatched to deal with protests at two sites in the city.

More unlawful activity is coming, they say.

A defiant Marisa Franco, campaign organizer for the National Day Laborer Organizing Network (NDLON), is helping to lead the Left's assault on the rule of law. "The people will take power back into their own hands and set a true example of leadership that the Beltway will have to follow."

Activists are taking the law into their own hands "out of frustration and impatience," said Franco. "Immigrant communities who are losing 1,100 loved ones every day to deportation cannot wait for Congress to end its political games or for the president to rediscover his moral compass," she whined.

NDLON is one of the worst of the illegal alien groups. NDLON relentlessly hounds cities to establish "day laborer centers" to help illegals find work and fights loitering laws that make finding work more difficult. It works with labor organizations such as AFL-CIO to unionize day laborers and pushes lawmakers to apply worker protections in U.S. labor law to illegal immigrants. By fighting for the so-called rights of illegal immigrants, NDLON and its ilk make it easier for illegals to stay stateside, which in turn encourages others to enter the U.S. illegally.

Nowadays NDLON has reason to be optimistic. One of its spiritual leaders, left-wing extremist Thomas Perez, is now U.S. secretary of labor. Perez was previously president of Casa de Maryland, a notorious advocacy group for illegal aliens funded by America-hating philanthropist George Soros and the dead communist leader of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez.

Soros, incidentally, is eager to leverage the immigration issue to hurt the GOP.

Starry-eyed Republicans think that backing amnesty will somehow win their party Latino votes but they never seem to factor in the exodus of conservative Republican voters their support of the legislation will all but guarantee. An added benefit, from the Left’s perspective, is the proposed mass amnesty would destroy once and for all the Republican Party. Democrats, on the other hand, are gunning for the legislation because it assures them a permanent leftist majority.

One of the more active progressive groups pushing amnesty, National Immigration Forum, has taken in more than $5.4 million from the billionaire Marxist's philanthropies.

NIF is planning an Oct. 28 "fly-in" of hundreds of alleged conservatives to Capitol Hill to strong-arm House Republicans into caving in on the amnesty issue. NIF is reportedly working with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s group FWD.us, and New York mayor Michael Bloomberg’s Partnership for a New American Economy.

Leftists like Soros are openly contemptuous of the rule of law. They’re not shy about admitting that the Left uses America’s confusing immigration system to promote so-called social justice. Eliseo Medina, secretary treasurer of the Service Employees International Union, says that boosting immigration levels will help push America further leftward. Immigration “will solidify and expand the progressive coalition for the future,” said Medina who is an honorary chairman of the Democratic Socialists of America.

The newly aggressive approach by NDLON activists contrasts with the usual tack taken by illegal alien supporters. Vigils, marches, and rallies are no longer in vogue as advocacy groups use phone-banking, email campaigns, and direct targeting of federal lawmakers and their staffers.

“These organizations stopped having faith in any progress for immigration reform,” according to Michael Young, a sociology professor at the University of Texas. “They’re distancing themselves from the national, more moderate organizations that said you have to worry about this will come off or how it will play to the national, broader audience.”

In June an angry mob of more than 100 activists led by a group called Sunflower Community Action surrounded the suburban Kansas City home of Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach (R), an outspoken illegal immigration opponent. Sunflower Community Action is part of a larger Saul Alinsky-inspired organizing network called National People’s Action (NPA). You might remember the joint actions conducted by NPA and SEIU. The two organizations use angry mobs to invade banks and terrorize bank executives in their homes.

The radical left-wing community organizers were attempting to intimidate Kobach and remind him that they knew where his family lived. They left a mountain of shoes on his front door to symbolize lawbreakers who had been deported. Incidentally, your federal tax dollars subsidize Sunflower Community Action's mischief. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has given the group $44,800 to promote "environmental justice," whatever that is.

Such jackboot activism is not legitimate political advocacy protected by the First Amendment. Its most prominent practitioner in recent years has been the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now. ACORN filed for bankruptcy on Election Day 2010 and is now splintered into more than two dozen groups across the nation

One of the shoe-throwing storm troopers, identified as Veronica Miranda, is now receiving taxpayer money to work as an Obamacare “navigator.” Kobach said people like Miranda should not be given public funds and access to Obamacare enrollees' sensitive personal information.

“She was more than trespassing,” Kobach said last week of the incident four months ago. “She was attempting to intimidate a public official.” Protesting at his office is fair game, he said, but “it crosses the line when you go to someone’s home and attempt to intimidate them."

“Now someone engaged in that kind of tactic is getting taxpayer money to implement Obamacare," Kobach said. "It’s crazy.”

Right now immigration legislation is stalled in Congress.

In June the Democrat-controlled U.S. Senate rammed through an immigration reform package on a 68 to 32 vote, falling short of the 70 votes backers said they were aiming for.

The immigration amnesty legislation that supporters refuse to acknowledge grants amnesty to illegal aliens provides for a bogus “border surge” that would beef up enforcement efforts — but which everyone in Washington knows will never actually be carried out. The bill perversely rewards employers for hiring illegal aliens over those legally allowed to work, and stays deportation efforts against criminal illegal aliens for two-and-a-half years to allow them to seek legal status. The legislation is also larded down with stimulus programs and political pork that has nothing to do with immigration. One provision would set aside $1.5 billion to provide low-income young people with taxpayer-funded vehicles such as cars, motorcycles, or scooters.

According to Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Alabama), who voted against the measure, the bill provides that an additional 4.5 million illegals will be legalized over the following decade. At that point the nation’s intake of immigrants will grow by at least 50 percent per year over 10 years for a total of 1.5 million immigrants a year being placed on a path to citizenship, or 15 million more for 10 years.

In addition to these 30 million immigrants placed on a path to citizenship, the measure would also double the quantity of temporary workers who could come and stay in the U.S. for three years, Sessions said. The workers would have the option to “re-up” for another three years with their families.

It is unclear if the Republican-controlled House of Representatives will act. Speaker of the House John Boehner (R-Ohio) has said House members plan to write their own version of the legislation and won’t consider the Senate bill.

Conservative amnesty opponents in the House GOP have repeatedly fired warning shots across the bow of House leadership. They say they’re willing to take away Boehner’s gavel if he doesn’t play ball on immigration. Boehner garnered only 220 votes in the election for Speaker in January this year, barely mustering the 218 votes he needed to claim the post.

In the painful, protracted soul-searching that has followed Mitt Romney’s defeat last November, some leading Republicans claim that to stave off political oblivion the GOP must wholeheartedly embrace comprehensive immigration reform including amnesty for those illegal aliens already in the country.

This is wishful thinking, of course. According to various studies including a Center for Immigration Studies (CIS) report, pandering to Latino voters will not gain the GOP Hispanic-American votes. Latinos are particularly hard to win over to the Republican side because they tend to be ideologically sympathetic to big-government solutions traditionally associated with Democrats.

Maddeningly, Republican leadership in the House of Representatives seems oblivious to the fact that new ethnic groups in the U.S. almost without exception vote for left-of-center political candidates.

Some psephologists say it takes four generations for these groups to move rightward and start voting Republican.

Can conservatives who want a restoration of limited government, the rule of law, and respect for the Constitution afford to wait that long?

Freedom Center pamphlets now available on Kindle: Click here.