Tennesseans who buy health insurance on the federally run exchange could see a jump in prices in 2016. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The state regulator approved Friday several large rate requests from health insurers' 2016 plans on the federal exchange - a decision that tries to strike a balance between meeting consumer needs and making sure insurance companies can meet financial obligations.

Five providers received approval from the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance to sell plans on the exchange in 2016.

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, the state's largest insurance provider, had its 36.3 percent average increase approved.

The rate increases will apply to the individual insurance plans sold on the federally run exchange. They do not impact plans offered by employers.

Julie Mix McPeak (Photo: Submitted)

Julie Mix McPeak, the commissioner of the TDCI, said the approvals did not come lightly, that it's "a very delicate balance" protecting consumers from high prices and ensuring that insurance providers are able to "make good on promises" to provide coverage.

"I'm very hesitant about consumers (not) understanding the rigorous process we went through approving these rates," said McPeak. "(It's) what concerns me the most... My hesitancy is people don’t understand the judicious process we went through evaluating these rates."

Early days

Tennessee's rates were lower than the national average in 2014 and 2015, in part, McPeak said because it had low individual rates before the Affordable Care Act.

Yet, the state had the highest average risk score - the least healthiest to insure - in the country of people coming onto the exchange, according to a recent federal report on health insurance risks.

BCBST lost $141 million in exchange covered plans in 2014; it paid $471 million in claims for those members. The rates it had approved may not be enough to keep it out of the red in 2016.

"We have not wanted to charge any more than we have to for our plans, but it does have to reflect the reality of the medical expenses for our members who have those plans," said Roy Vaughn, vice president for corporate communications for BCBST. "(The increase) really doesn't cover all the expenses at this point."

In Tennessee, 182,893 people bought insurance on the exchange, created under the ACA, for 2015. More than 80 percent of Tennesseans who buy plans on the exchange receive a tax credit to offset the monthly premiums.

For some of the people who receive tax credits, the premiums may be in line with what they are paying now. For others who don't qualify for subsidies, the plans they have may carry significantly higher price tags.

"There are going to be some surprised people" when open enrollment begins November, said Austin Madison, vice president at The Crichton Group.

Tatum Allsep, executive director of Music Health Alliance, which helps musicians access health care, said her organization will be waiting to see the plan details to help people compare networks, costs and coverage.

At first glance the jump in rates "creates a panic for everyone," Allsep said. "We are going to create a gigantic spreadsheet (to) literally create an apples-to-apples comparison so we can see the cost benefit ratio and determine what's the best bang for the buck in Tennessee."

The details behind the final rate approvals vary by insurer.

Community Health Alliance, a cooperative based in Knoxville, saw its original rate request of 32.2 percent jump to 44.7 percent - making it the insurance carrier with the largest rate hike of the year.

It had been frozen from selling plans a month before open enrollment ended because it hit its enrollment target early. McPeak talked of concerns about the co-op's financial viability at a Congressional hearing in June.

Humana’s average rate increase fell 10 percent because it withdrew its plan to offer an insurance in the "platinum" category on the exchange after it made its initial rate filing.

The platinum category is plushest level of insurance plan offered on the exchange, which uses bronze, silver, gold and platinum to classify the plans.

Cigna asked for, and received, an average increase, 0.4 percent, that is lower than most because it is moving from a preferred provider organization, or PPO, structure to an exclusive provider organization, or EPO, in two of its three product types.

EPOs are a limited network insurance plan where members have access to providers and hospitals within the network but no out-of-network benefits.

WHAT HEALTH INSURERS RECEIVED

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee: 36.3 percent average increase.

Cigna: 0.4 percent average increase.

Humana: Requested 15.8 percent average increase. Received 5.8 percent average increase

Community Health Alliance: requested 32.2 percent average increase. Received 44.7 percent average increase.

UnitedHealthcare: First year on the Tennessee exchange; requested approval for monthly premiums that range from $94.10 to $1,122.97.

HOW ARE PREMIUMS DETERMINED?

Insurance companies determine premiums on a pool of people and the risk associated with that collection. Some members will have higher costs while others have lower costs.

Premiums are essentially paid into a pool of money, which is used to pay claims. More-than-expected claims tax that pool. Fewer claims mean money is not being used.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Lp5Y7j