For more than 70 years, vaccine makers have been manufacturing influenza shots and nasal sprays made from viruses injected into chicken eggs.

But the flu season of 2014-15 is showing that manufacturers need a new way to respond to the ever-changing virus.

Enter Vaxinnate, a Cranbury biotechnology firm that is working on a new way to develop the vaccine quicker and more efficiently. Under the company’s plan, there would be no need for a massive supply of chicken eggs, but a bit of E. coli bacteria and a fermenter.

Besides using fertilized chicken eggs, flu vaccines can be made in a process that mixes egg-grown viruses with mammalian cells.

There’s a third method, approved for production by the Food and Drug Administration in 2013. It’s recombinant technology, which Vaxinnate uses.

The company’s proprietary technology involves genetically fusing vaccine antigens to the bacterial protein flagellin, which stimulates the immune system.

Recombinant technology gives a company like Vaxinnate a production edge, said CEO Wayne Pisano. Whereas a facility such as the Swiftwater, Pa. production plant operated by Sanofi Pasteur -- which Pisano served as CEO until retiring in 2011 -- can produce more than 100 million doses per year, Vaxinnate’s technology will be able to produce several hundred million doses, he said.

“The yields are exceptionally high,” he said.

A manufacturing facility would require around $25 million, Pisano said, a fraction of the cost of traditional manufacturing capital costs. For example, a new facility in North Carolina built by Novartis and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that uses the cell culture manufacturing process cost $650 million to build, Novartis said.

The recombinant technology requires less viral material to create a full dose, making the process more efficient and less costly, he added.

Further, it promises to be a reliable technology, another potential advantage. Production quality became an issue in the industry this year after a batch of egg-based vaccines produced in a Quebec facility operated by GlaxoSmithKline, now called GSK, had to be destroyed because of production irregularities.

Production time also could be cut from at least six months now to nine to 12 weeks using the recombinant technology, Pisano said. Recombinant technology can produce vaccines in the shortest amount of time because it is not dependent on an egg supply or limited by the selection of vaccine viruses that are adapted for growth in eggs, CDC says.

That’s where the experience of this year’s flu season is a factor. The virus earlier this year began mutating after the World Health Organization made its recommendations on the composition of the vaccine. By the time the change was noticed and confirmed, however, it was too late to adjust the production schedule.

With a shorter turnaround time, supplemental vaccines could be produced to protect against the mutated strains, even if just for those who need the protection the most – the elderly and healthcare workers, Pisano said.

“That is the attractiveness to the United States government,” which is Vaxinnate’s primary funder, Pisano said.

It’s also the promise for the recombinant flu vaccine, which is still a few years away from production. The company this year completed a successful Phase I trial and is planning its next set of tests for 2015.

Besides testing for efficacy, the company also will be testing to find the right amount of dosage, Pisano said. If everything goes according to schedule, Vaxinnate’s flu vaccine could be ready for widespread distribution by 2019, he said.

Currently, 55 people work at the Cranbury facility, but employment could jump by 100 more if commercial production begins. Add on other vaccines in the works for mosquito-borne infectious diseases such as dengue and chikengunya, Pisano said, and employment could bump up to as much as 500, he said.

But before it reaches that point, Vaxinnate will have to go through the time-consuming but necessary process of human testing.

“You have to crawl before you walk and you have to walk before you run,” Pisano said.

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.