A series of deafening explosions was the soundtrack as the old University of Colorado Hospital’s eight-story Biomedical Research building in Denver collapsed like a house of cards.

The building at East Ninth Avenue and Colorado Boulevard was demolished at 8 a.m. Saturday as work continues to prepare the long-vacant east Denver campus for a $419 million redevelopment.

WATCH: Mayor Hancock pushed the button on the implosion

WATCH: Slow motion and high-speed time lapse footage of the implosion

Colorado Boulevard, closed since early Saturday morning, was open again around 11:45 a.m. once the dust settled a bit and cleanup crews cleared the scene.

Before the explosion, drones circled the skies in front of the building that had been demolished inside and filled with around 170 charges, ready for the prepared blast to send it crashing to the ground in a heap of rubble and a plume of dust.

While locals were kept a safe distance away from the scene, many could be seen perched atop their roofs and parking garages awaiting the scheduled implosion.

After the nearly 30-second explosion that sent the building tumbling and was likely loud enough to wake any folks taking advantage of a Saturday morning sleep-in, a cloud of smoke slowly disseminated across the city.

The building was environmentally cleared for demolition by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and does not contain any asbestos, officials said.

Frank Cannon, development director for Denver-based Continuum Partners, said the implosion was chosen as a safer and more convenient alternative to dismantling the building, which would have caused daily road closures along Colorado Boulevard and headaches for nearly four months.

The building was imploded to make way for the new development, which includes about 12 city blocks filled with apartments, retail shops, offices and a hotel, Cannon said.

Around 1,100 residential units are planned for the space, with about 10 percent of those being affordable housing units.

Cannon hopes eight of the 12 city blocks will be completed within the next five years.

Mayor Michael Hancock was stationed across the street from the building, eager to watch the implosion.

He said the community was excited and involved in the redevelopment process.

“It’s on every mayor’s agenda to push the button and implode a building to make way for progress,” Hancock said.

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ehernandez

By the numbers

• The project is expected to cost $419 million.

• The Denver City Council approved $47.9 million in tax-increment financing for the project.

• The project covers 26 acres.

• The development calls for 250,000 square feet of retail, 125,000 square feet of office space and up to 1,100 residential units.