As Putin’s Russia enters ever deeper into the quagmire of potential world conflict, a beauty pageant has been arranged in the country and has already garnered some interest, despite Russia’s other issues.

But this isn’t just a normal beauty pageant — this one is Nazi-themed, and has already caused considerable offense to many people.

The pageant, which has aptly been dubbed “Miss Hitler 2014,” calls on attractive Russian females who think they have what it takes to win to send in sexy selfies of themselves wearing something Nazi related and explaining exactly why they “love and revere the Third Reich of Adolf Hitler.”

The disturbing pageant, which is officially called “Miss Ostland,” after the territory occupied by the Nazis in eastern Europe where more than a million Jews were murdered, is a social media pageant, and the girl with the most likes wins the crown.

To that end, the first prize in the competition is a piece of expensive jewelry from a company called Magic Workshop, featuring one of the Nordic runes that were so beloved of Heinrich Himmler and the SS.

The second prize is a pretty pendant combining the classic German Iron Cross and Third Reich heraldry.

There are already 14 contestants in the competition, which is being hosted by the social media website, VKontakte, some of which are violent anti-semites, despite their stunning beauty.

One such contestant, Katya Shkredova, from Mogilev in Belarus, who sent in a selfie of herself wearing a Nazi hat, said she loves Hitler because he was willing to “experiment on people.” By “experimenting,” it is assumed she means the horrific and barbaric medical experiments carried out on Jews who had been captured during WWII.

Another young contestant, Irina Nagrebetskaya from Kiev, in the Ukraine, said she thinks Adolf Hitler is beyond human.

“Don’t forget! Adolf is his name, he’s our eternal race, he has been given eternal life,” read her caption.

The Miss Hitler 2014 pageant has obviously sparked outrage pretty much across the board on social media, with some people saying the site should be blocked and banned for hosting such a hate-filled and subversive online event.

The VKontakte website has more than 7,000 followers, and interest in the site and what it stands for is growing rapidly.