Alicia Modoor tends bar at Smoke BBQ this summer at 487 King Street. The restaurant is one of the few establishments taking part in the Charleston’s soft-closings program.

Michael Feldman, owner of Smoke BBQ, jumped at the chance to keep his business open until 3 a.m., even though he still has to stop serving alcohol at 2 a.m.

There aren’t many late-night places to eat in the city’s entertainment district, he said. And he’s going to be one of the few to feed the late night revelers before they jump into their cars and head home, he said.

Earlier this month, the city of Charleston moved ahead with a 90-day pilot project to allow bars in the peninsula’s entertainment district — which includes portions of Meeting, King and East Bay streets and the Market area — to stay open an extra hour, without serving alcohol. The effort, called “soft closings,” is aimed at increasing public safety by ensuring that not all bargoers pour out into the street at the same time. It’s part of a larger plan to better manage late night activity in the city.

Lt. Heath King, with the Charleston Police Department, said only five businesses so far have asked to be part of the pilot, which runs through Dec. 8. And only three of them have actually selected dates to begin doing it, he said. That list includes Smoke, Boone’s Bar and the Upper Deck Tavern. All of those businesses are on King Street.

“We’ll have a full menu,” Feldman said. “We’ll just keep going until 2:45 a.m., then get everyone out by 3 a.m.”

But the pilot plan has a few issues, he said. It requires bar owners to not only remove all the alcohol before 2 a.m., but they also must turn on the lights to their brightest level and turn off the music. And they can’t allow in any patrons who weren’t already inside before 2 a.m.

“That’s what most bar owners complain about,” Feldman said of the restrictions. “I’m not fond of them either,” he said. “But people still will be eating food.”

He hopes that the city will consider amending the rules after the 90-day pilot is complete. And he’s pleased the city is trying something new. “We’re happy to be the guinea pigs,” he said.

City Councilman Dean Riegel, who was a strong opponent of an earlier plan to rein in rowdy late night bar patrons by placing a moratorium on new establishments that serve alcohol after midnight, said he’s disappointed with the low rate of participation in the pilot program. “I thought soft closings would be very welcome, very well received.”

The city will revisit the issue after the 90-day pilot is over, he said, and decide if it should continue the plan as it is, modify it, or drop the idea entirely.

He thinks the restrictions might be getting in the way of the program being successful, especially requiring businesses to turn on bright lights and turn off the music. “That takes away all the ambiance,” he said, “the reason for hanging around.”

Reach Diane Knich at 937-5491 or on Twitter @dianeknich.