WASHINGTON (MarketWatch) — A gauge of confidence among home builders rose in September to the highest level in almost nine years, as builders’ views on present and coming sales rose, according to data released Wednesday.

The overall gauge of builder sentiment rose 4 points to 59 in September, according to National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo. Readings above 50 signal that builders, generally, are optimistic about sales trends, and September marks the third consecutive month of above-50 readings.

A strengthening jobs market is perking up builders, though there are still major headwinds from strict credit standards, among other factors.

Confidence among home builders is running higher than levels historically seen at recent building rates for new homes. On Thursday, markets will get an even clearer picture of the housing trend as the government reports on new home construction. Economists polled by MarketWatch expect to find out that the pace of construction slowed in August.

There is reason for optimism. Economists are forecasting faster sales and construction of new homes as the economy adds jobs at a healthy rate. Also, mortgage rates remain relatively low, making financing relatively affordable.

However, not all borrowers are able to take advantage of cheap mortgages. Years after the financial meltdown lenders’ loan standards are still so high that some creditworthy borrowers haven’t been able to get a mortgage. Also, the number of borrowers, who can afford home loans, has shrunk due to rapidly rising house prices over the past year.

Data details from Wednesday’s report showed that NAHB’s gauge of builders’ views on coming sales of single-family homes rose 2 points to 67 in September, while a barometer of builders’ views on present sales rose 5 points to 63, and a gauge of prospective-buyer traffic increased 5 points to 47.

“The data continue to suggest that the housing recovery is back on track,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief U.S. economist at High Frequency Economics.

Early Wednesday, Lennar LEN, -0.09% one of the top U.S. home builders, reported fiscal third-quarter earnings and revenue that jumped up from the year-earlier period. The most recent report from the government on new single-family homes throughout the U.S. showed that the sales pace fell to a four-month low in July.

It’s worth noting, however that single-family home data series is volatile, and sales could point higher in coming reports.

More from MarketWatch