MCLEAN, Va., Jan. 6, 2016 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Cognosante today announced the promotion of Davis Foster to President of its Health Data and Communications (HDC) Business Unit, where she will continue guiding the company's work with government healthcare agencies.



Davis was previously General Manager of the unit, overseeing business process outsourcing and IT services, solutions, and growth strategies. As HDC General Manager, Davis oversaw the company's work with Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, implementing key aspects of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). This oversight included a first-of-its-kind ACA enrollment and outreach program, and a critical, large scale data reconciliation effort supporting consumers who have enrolled in healthcare coverage through the Federally Facilitated Marketplace and State-Based Marketplaces.



"Davis exemplifies the Cognosante spirit, with a strong devotion to our clients and the consumers they serve," said Michele Kang, CEO of Cognosante. "Her expertise and passion influence every aspect of her work, and have helped her become an exemplary leader within Cognosante and the healthcare industry as a whole."



"Our mission at Cognosante is to transform this country's healthcare system and touch consumer lives," said Davis. "I take great pride in how this goal is accomplished and look forward to expanding our efforts in its pursuit."



About Cognosante



Cognosante is a leading provider of consulting, technology, and BPO services to healthcare organizations, specializing in Health Reform initiatives. The company has more than 25 years of experience working with 48 states and the Federal government to assist its clients in developing, managing, and executing complex healthcare information programs and infrastructures. Its expertise includes health insurance marketplaces, enrollment reconciliation, healthcare standards, modular system integration, health informatics, Medicaid, health information exchange, and fraud, waste, and abuse. Visit cognosante.com for more information.

Media Contact Laura Herlihy Director, Marketing 703-206-6039