The rise of the female entrepreneur

Women are saying “no thanks” to luxe corporate corner offices and tiny cubicles alike, to office politics and even the seeming security of fat paychecks and sweet benefits packages. They’ve shunned the traditional 9-to-5 and instead, more and more women are doing what Kim Stratton and Sharon Schneider did: opting-in to owning their own businesses. In fact, a movement of sorts is underway, as women become entrepreneurs at a national rate that outpaces men. Stratton is a new restaurant owner, and Schneider started MoxieJean.com only three years ago.

“Women entrepreneurs have significantly increased their economic impact in the past few decades. Today, women business owners are the fastest growing segment of the economy,” says Carla Harris, chairwoman of the National Women Business Council. “The work of the council is grounded in the belief that women have innovative ideas, that women are strong leaders and that women are launching businesses that create value and solve problems.”

The council is a nonpartisan federal advisory organization that makes policy recommendations to the White House, Congress and the federal Small Business Administration. Its 2014 annual report states that more than a quarter of U.S. companies are headed or owned by a woman.

That confirms a phenomenon state Sen. Linda Holmes says she’d already gotten wind of in her district. Holmes says that the city of Aurora, which she represents, has seen small women-owned businesses pop up in droves over the last decade. A longtime business owner herself, Holmes says she wants to capitalize on the startup growth by supporting the women and helping them grow. To be considered woman-owned, at least 51 percent of a business’ ownership, equity, interest or stock must be owned by a woman.

“Small business is what employs most people. We have noticed in the past years that women are becoming more and more apt to become business owners (and) because of that, we’re trying to foster the ability of women to reach out to other women and act as mentors,” says Holmes, a member of the Senate Labor Committee and chairwoman of the Commerce and Economic Development Committee.

This undeclared women’s movement represents an injection of good news for a state that’s become notorious for unsavory political doings and fiscal strife. The U.S. Census Survey of Business Owners from 2007 indicates that in Illinois, 343,117 of the state’s 1.1 million businesses were owned by women — three out of 10. That’s up 20.4 percent from 284,954 in 2002, and means the state ranked fifth in the nation, which makes sense given that Illinois is the fifth most populous state in the country.

The Survey of Business Owners offers the most recent government statistics about women-owned enterprises. On the local level, Cook County was second only to Los Angeles County. Chicago’s 92,132 women-owned firms made it No. 3 among cities, trailing only New York and Los Angeles. The Chicago-Naperville-Joliet metropolitan area also had the third largest number of women-owned businesses with 271,068. The Census records business data every five years; information for 2012 will be released this year.

In the meantime, a 2014 estimate by credit-card and financial-services giant American Express counts 388,700 women-owned businesses in Illinois. Most of them — 308,700 — are said to be in the Chicago metropolitan area, which is where both Stratton and Schneider set up shop. The numbers show that the upward trend continues and raises the question of why women are increasingly choosing this path.

The reasons are as varied as the women themselves.

On January 31, Stratton offered a spread of her home-cooked, southern-style fare for a modest crowd of supporters. They had turned out for the grand opening of her new restaurant, Kim Stratton’s Kitchen. The gospel singer-turned-restaurateur had a mind to open a restaurant in December 2013. A series of baby steps helped her move from cooking and catering as a side hustle to opening her cafeteria-style eatery, located in the basement of a 10-story office building in the northwest Chicago suburb of Palatine.

She became a culinary entrepreneur “accidentally on purpose,” but says she’s gratified to be in business for herself and helping others have work opportunities. For her, the journey began working alongside her mother — observing and emulating the matriarch’s culinary prowess. “I was her sous chef. I chopped everything,” she says. And as she returned home from singing gigs on the road, Stratton would retreat to her kitchen for relaxation and solace — and helpings of her homemade favorites. “I love to cook like I love singing,” says Stratton, who has received multiple Grammy and Stellar awards nominations for her music.

“I didn’t really know what all [starting a business] entails, and I think I’m glad I didn’t know,” she says.

Schneider had an inkling of what to do when she walked away from what she characterizes as a lucrative corporate philanthropy job. She conferred with her mother and sister and co-founded MoxieJean.com, an online, upscale, baby clothing resale shop.

“I wanted to move from advising traditional philanthropy to really doing something,” says Schneider, a married mother of three who considers herself a bit of an environmentalist. The linguistics major became disenchanted with corporate culture. Instead, she wanted to make money — and make the world a better place. “I don’t love this culture, so let me go create my own,” she recalls thinking. She melded motherhood, workplace dissatisfaction and her desire to save the planet to create her online store. She even discovered a vogue phrase for starting a business with a pointed purpose: social entrepreneurship. That’s the ethos under which she launched her Arlington Heights-based company in August 2011.

The National Women’s Business Council report indicates that women-owned businesses are making money and having a measurable economic impact. The Census data backs the claim, indicating that, collectively, women-owned businesses had revenue of $53.7 billion in 2007, an increase of 14.7 percent over the $46.8 billion in 2002. The report states that women’s enterprises are thriving and growing, creating employment opportunities for others. Stratton’s restaurant employs three full-time workers.

A woman starts her business with half as much money as a man does, according to the council’s report. But the revenue figures show just how much intensity some women pour into their businesses. “Mostly as an entrepreneur you’re broke,” says Schneider — laughing but serious. “That’s the part that everybody doesn’t talk about. You’re putting all the money into your business; you’re not taking money out.”



One of the council’s key recommendations to policymakers will be improving women’s access to capital. The money would help even more women start businesses and help others grow and expand. Stratton and Schneider both emptied their personal savings to get their business going. The council says many women do that, opting not to seek business loans, either because they don’t know about them or fear they won’t be approved.

Stratton says she regrets not looking into loans. Schneider is shopping for investors. Illinois has a number of loan, grant and venture capital options through the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity and other state agencies. DCEO’s Advantage Illinois program, for example, collaborates with private lenders to make loans and provide venture capital to small businesses. In 2014, Advantage Illinois subsidized $5.4 million in loans to 29 women-owned businesses. Four women received state venture capital money through the program, totaling $457,500, according to agency records. The money was part of a 2010 federal law that helps states aid some of their small businesses. Further, 997 women-owned businesses are listed as vendors with the state through the Illinois Business Enterprise Program.

Among the National Women’s Business Council’s other expected recommendations: implementing tax credits for investors who help women finance their businesses; encouraging women in the fields of science, technology, engineering and math; creating opportunities for women business owners to connect with government and corporate procurement; and making child care more affordable.

It would be difficult to understate the importance of that last one. “Child care burdens are a significant impediment to growth,” the council states. It’s something Schneider knows all too well. She says helping women with child care costs would be a boost. Her children were 7, 5 and 1 when she set out to launch MoxieJean.com. Care for the baby was $300 weekly — more than $1,200 each month. “That’s a huge amount of money,” Schneider says.

Holmes echoes those concerns: “Women business owners have some different challenges that they have to deal with than perhaps a man might.” She says despite their entrepreneurial pursuits, they’re still often taking care of households — including cooking, cleaning, chasing toddlers and helping with homework — as they get their businesses off the ground and work to grow them. “We need to make sure women have access to child care,” Holmes says.

Illinois does have a child care subsidy program for low-income families, but it has been underfunded in recent fiscal years, including the current one.

Holmes says with the increase in women-owned start-ups in her district, she looks forward to finding out what — if any — legislation could benefit them. “Starting a business is not a part-time endeavor. It takes a huge amount” of time investment, she says.

Each of the women have had unexpected discoveries on their journeys to being owners and chief executives. People who aren’t entrepreneurs, they say, think the women enjoy a lifestyle reminiscent of a perpetual tropical vacation with cash as low-hanging fruit on tree-lined beaches. Nowhere near, they quip.

Stratton admits she had the misguided notion that her schedule, as the boss, would be light. She chuckles at her initial thinking that she would go into “the office” a few days a week. But she quickly learned that the restaurant would be like her second home. She spends 12 or more hours there every day. “You have to nurture” the business, she says. “Babysit it.”

Schneider says she realizes it may be a while — possibly years — before she has substantial profits. Entrepreneurs, including women, grind hard at the start “so that someday you’ll enjoy the benefits.” Being an entrepreneur, Schneider says, is “not a short term strategy for (building) wealth.”

Nevertheless, Stratton got teary-eyed one day, after she had closed her new restaurant for the evening. As she turned the key in the door to lock it, reality sunk in. She had become a bona fide member of the movement.

She says, “That was a feel-good moment.”

Illinois Issues, March 2015