Jorge Ramos, anchor for Fusion’s “America” and himself an immigrant, slammed President Obama on Twitter Saturday following the president’s decision to delay executive actions on immigration until after the midterm elections in November.

“President @BarackObama once again delays action on immigration,” tweeted Ramos. “He promised on June 30th to act before the end of the summer. Now he won’t.”

“A promise is a promise/ Una promesa es una promesa,” reads a tweet from a few minutes later.

“This presidential delay means that more innocent people will be deported and more families separated,” he continued in another post to the social media site. “It’s the triumph of partisan politics.”

President @BarackObama once again delays action on immigration. He promised on June 30th to act before the end of the summer. Now he won't. — JORGE RAMOS (@jorgeramosnews) September 6, 2014

A promise is a promise/ Una promesa es una promesa — JORGE RAMOS (@jorgeramosnews) September 6, 2014

This presidential delay means that more innocent people will be deported and more families separated.It's the triumph of partisan politics. — JORGE RAMOS (@jorgeramosnews) September 6, 2014

White House officials explained that the president is refusing to act on immigration until after the midterm elections so as not to “politicize” the issue, according to the Associated Press.

As Mediaite points out, this isn’t the first time that Ramos has called out Obama for his broken promises on immigration. In 2012 during a face-to-face interview with Obama, Ramos exposed the fact that the president did not make any progress on immigration reform during his first year in office despite his promise to do so.

“You promised that,” Ramos had told the president. “A promise is a promise. And with all due respect, you didn’t keep that promise.”

During an interview with NBC’s Chuck Todd on “Meet the Press” Sunday, Obama said that saving the Democratic Senate was “not the reason” for putting off any executive action on immigration. He also blamed the border crisis over the summer for his need to delay such executive action.

H/T Mediaite