Topics: Barack Obama, Conservatives, Editor's Picks, Fox News, George Lakoff, Kevin Phillips, Liberals, Innovation News, Politics News

In the mid-term elections, the GOP’s not-so-secret weapon was fear. Fear of Ebola, fear of ISIS, and fear of immigrants all played a significant role in shaping the pre-election political climate, and Democrats for the most part, responded by hunkering down into a defensive crouch.

Once again, as in 2010, they largely abandoned any pro-active agenda setting of their own, any talk of breaking new ground, exploring new possibilities—even despite the greater-than-hoped-for success of Obamacare—and they certainly lacked the patience, maturity and self-confidence to stand back and criticize the childish, self-defeating fearfulness at the heart of the GOP’s campaign strategy. Republicans had one thing going for them—fear. Democrats had two potential strengths they turned their backs on—innovation and maturity. By failing to capitalize on those potential strengths, Democrats spent almost the entire campaign hunkered down, just waiting for the fear-based attack to come.

To put it mildly, it was not a strategic position of enormous strength, much less one of flexibility. Things changed rapidly during the campaign, and even more dramatically afterwards, as all three of those fears have faded rapidly into the background by now. Yet, the Democrats’ defensive crouch left them unable to take advantage of any changing situations. Democrats even proved entirely unable to take advantage of the unforeseen extent of Obamacare’s success, which deprived the GOP of their key pre-planned bogeyman for the campaign. On top of everything, fear of being identified with Obama was a widespread concern which hobbled many campaigns and even crippled some—a dynamic which looks increasingly ridiculous in hindsight, as Obama’s been particularly successful in taking major actions after the Democrats’ miserable mid-term showing.

It didn’t have to be that way.

More than 80 years ago, in his first inaugural address, FDR addressed a frightened and uncertain nation, and told them, “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself—nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.” Not only has today’s Democratic Party lost its way in terms of building on its New Deal economic heritage—which helped create the largest middle class in human history—it’s just as lost in terms of the over-riding can-do sense of purpose which made Roosevelt’s success possible. What’s more, it’s lost the momentum, not so much in generating new ideas, as in pushing the out into the world, so that they shape our shared perceptions of what’s real, what’s possible, and what’s desirable as well.

Fear is a powerful political motivator, in some ways, perhaps the most powerful of them all, but by calling fear out, and naming it as the one thing we were truly wise to fear, Roosevelt performed one of the most profound and significant acts of political transformation in American history. In a single stroke, he largely immunized himself to the repeated waves of fear which he would inevitably face in the years to come. As a result—working together with millions of Americans and hundreds of thousands of activists—Roosevelt was able to both save and fundamentally transform both American capitalism and its surrounding political culture, virtually creating the modern middle class out of the ruins of the Great Depression.

Things are different today. For one thing, President Obama is himself a source of fear for many white Americans, particularly conservatives. Roosevelt, too, was hated by conservatives, portrayed by anti-Semites as part of a world-wide Jewish conspiracy to run the world. But in reality, his ancestors were already old money by the time of the American Revolution. The fears rallied against Obama—fantastical though they were—had far greater surface plausibility, but more importantly, America’s entire political culture is radically different today—a point that will be explored more below—on top of which Obama’s non-elite background made him far less self-assured in directly confronting his elite opponents—the “malefactors of great wealth”, as FDR described them. Obama’s efforts to allay the fears whipped up against him by acting with restraint have proved fruitless, in large part simply because he is black and in part because conservatives were so violently opposed to compromising with him, treating every effort to compromise as either a trick to be drawn back from, or a sign of weakness, meaning they should double down on their demands.

Conservative hostility had multiple sources, not least the fact that everything conservatives had believed in during the Bush years had crumbled to dust. Nothing had worked the way it was supposed to. The Clinton era of relative peace and prosperity had given way to a time of catastrophic failure at home and abroad, and the 2008 electoral map showed it: for the first time since 1964, a Democrat won the states of Virginia and Indiana. Speaking of 1964, some Democrats hoped that Obama would be an LBJ-style figure, substantially updating and expanding the New Deal legacy which forms the core of what the modern Democratic Party means and has meant since the 1930s. But his allegiance to corporatism, Wall Street and neo-liberalism has made him more a Tony Blair-style figure of continuity with Bush than a sharp break with him. And yet, that has done nothing at all to dim the fears and hostility that’s been marshaled against him. If anything, Obama’s efforts to placate conservatives have only made them more profoundly hostile and suspicious on the one hand—as epitomized by birtherism, and the NRA’s repeated claims (here, here, here, etc.) that massive gun confiscation is imminent—and more demanding on the other, as epitomized by their ever-increasing demands to cut government spending on programs for the poor and the middle class.

This dynamic obviously has a lot to do with the recent history of American politics, as well as Obama’s race, but it also has much deeper roots as well. As explored in a story I wrote last summer, the conservative reliance on fear has a documented foundation in what’s known as “negativity bias,” but could just as well be called “threat bias.” That story focused primarily on a paper, “Differences in negativity bias underlie variations in political ideology,” by lead author John R. Hibbing of the University of Nebraska, which I noted “advances three successive waves of evidence, which combine to show that conservatives differ from liberals by having stronger, more intense reactions to negative aspects of the environment — such as physical threats, or potential sources of disease — which are ultimately physiological.” It’s not that fear alone explains conservatism. As I wrote in that piece:

To understand what Hibbing and his colleagues have achieved, it’s useful to compare their work to a 2003 paper, “Political Conservatism as Motivated Social Cognition,” by John Jost and colleagues, which made a more modest, but related claim that conservatism could be understood as an ensemble of tendencies within a unified framework. That paper focused on psychological survey data — information gleaned from conscious questioning in 88 separate studies across decades of research in 12 countries. It did not claim that motivated reasoning was limited to conservatives, or that motivated reasoning was necessarily false, although many of its initial critics in Congress and elsewhere jumped to those conclusions (and some even threatened to defund the entire field of research into political psychology). But the paper’s abstract did say that “Analyzing political conservatism as motivated social cognition integrates theories of personality (authoritarianism, dogmatism–intolerance of ambiguity), epistemic and existential needs (for closure, regulatory focus, terror management), and ideological rationalization (social dominance, system justification).”

It was, I wrote, “an intriguing array of diverse yet interrelated factors, crying out for some sort of simplifying insight that could explain how and why they all fit together in some relatively simple, straightforward manner,” and that’s what Hibbing’s focus on threat bias provides. Regarding Hibbing’s paper, I explained:

[T]he authors’ argument proceeds in four stages. First, an examination of “liberal-conservative psychological differences as reflected in (survey) self-reports,” which was established in Jost’s 2003 meta-analysis, and has been expanded on since. They note that two of the five core personality traits — known as the Big Five — correlate consistently with political orientation “across a broad range of studies” — conservatives score higher on conscientiousness while liberals score higher on openness to new experiences. (The other three traits are agreeableness, extraversion and emotional stability). Second, they review “psychological differences that are not fully accessible to the participants themselves,” such as differences in responding to negative imagery. Third, they describe evidence of “physiological differences between liberals and conservatives,” including differences in brain structure and function. Fourth, they present a synthesis of the research “arguing that many of the correlations described are tied together by the common thread of differences in response patterns to negative stimuli.” They point out that “Good evolutionary reasons exist for negativity bias given that negative events can be much more costly in fitness terms than positive events are beneficial; to state the obvious, infection, injury, and death curtail reproductive opportunities.”

Hence, negativity/threat bias plays a key role, not in isolation, but as an initiator and orchestrator of the wider array of phenomena others have studied for decades. What’s important for political psychology is not just threat bias, but the fact that it varies across the population. Among the many noteworthy points made in the paper, two are worth highlighting here. First, threat bias may have evolutionary origins, with heightened threat bias playing a more important survival role before the development of means to survive life-threatening injuries. “In modern life, on the other hand, threats are less immediate and the selection pressures for elevated negativity biases have likely been reduced, opening the door for substantial genetic variation at relevant loci.”

Second, a diversity of threat-bias levels in a population may be beneficial, in the same way that a diversity of immunological responses is. But what’s beneficial for small group survival may produce major problems in larger social groups:

Just as groups of spiders benefit from having a mix of social and asocial members and virtually all species benefit from having individuals with different immune systems, the argument is that human groups benefit from having members who are differentially responsive and attentive to negative stimuli. If this were true, the polarization that afflicts many modern democracies may be a vestige of the mixes of the behaviorally relevant, biological predispositions that worked well in small-scale societies.

One thing that’s particularly noteworthy about these two observations is that they present negativity/threat bias as a natural phenomena, even a positive good at one point in our evolutionary development, yet also as potentially deeply problematic. It’s not all good or all bad, but mixed—a typically nuanced liberal view of liberalism’s implacable enemies.

The flip side of heightened threat bias may not be as sharply defined, as Hibbing notes, but a relative freedom from fear clearly allows for a greater willingness to explore, less fear of others and the unknown, heightened curiosity, a propensity to innovate, etc.— all aspects of the Big Five trait of “openness to new experiences,” identified with liberalism, as noted above. It allows for other aspects of liberalism to flourish as well, particularly a greater capacity for complexity of thought and self-reflection that comes with greater cognitive development—development that’s more favored by decreasing fear. As the world becomes a safer place overall with the advance of civilization, these liberal traits, bringing more deliberation and less impulsive action, are less likely to incur dangerous consequences, which means they have less of a social cost, even as their potential benefits rise.

As societies increase their capacity to create a safer, more nurturing world, these liberal traits are more likely to be socially valuable, because a safer, more nurturing world, which reflects these liberal values is one with reduced actual threats, increased remedies, and greater potential rewards from synergies of different exploratory advances. (The world will also become more friendly to other liberal-related traits or tendencies as well, such as tolerance for uncertainty, and increased integrative complexity—the capacity to first differentiate multiple perspectives and/or dimensions and subsequently integrate or synthesize them. More on this below). This is an example of “reflexivity” as George Lakoff described it when I interviewed him:

It has to do with the fact that thought is part of the world. That when you’re thinking, it’s not separate from reality, it’s part of reality. And if your understanding of the world is reflected in what you do, then that thought comes into the world through your actions. And then through your actions, if many people have the same ideas, those ideas are going to spread, and they’re going to come back and reinforce themselves, because they will change the world.

Thus, the evidence suggests that the process of civilization, though shot through with contradictions—most notably how it treats those deemed “not civilized”—is a fundamentally liberalizing process, in which reflexivity plays a crucial role, making the world increasingly safe for more liberal values to be expressed, and bear good fruit. This is only a probabilistic processes however, and contrary cycles of conservative reflexivity can certainly take hold—as they clearly did in Germany after World War I, for example—and have repeatedly done after every major advance in black rights in America, including Obama’s election. Indeed, the widely-observed phenomena of civilizational rise and fall may point to an inherent tendency for a limit to be reached, a tipping point, triggered most probably by resource scarcity which shifts the balance from the dominance of liberal to conservative reflexivity.

We can gain a bit more insight into this process from “Wealth and Democracy: A Political History of the American Rich” in which Kevin Phillips included a comparison of America’s trajectory as a world power with its three immediate predecessors as the leading world power: Spain, Holland and Britain. “Leading economic powers are not made or unmade overnight,” he wrote. “Each of the three that preceded the United States gained that status over roughly a half century, always amid a powerful convergence of commercial, political, geographic, and cultural forces.” He provided brief summaries of the cycles of each power’s rise and fall, then summarized:

Even these short capsules preview some striking recurrences. The early decades of each emerging economic primacy-Greater Spain in the 1520s and 1530s, Holland in 1600 or 1615, late Georgian and regency Britain-were fat years for each nation’s economic elite. But it was the subsequent heydays, the golden ages, that brought the flood tide of commercial opportunity, new markets, and wealth that produced the broadest benefit for the largest number. Thereafter, each nation’s relative distribution of wealth and income would narrow. Stratification would set in….

America’s three decades of post-WWII prosperity were part of this pattern as a golden age par excellence. But as for what came after, Phillips went on to make three significant points:

Each power experiences an unexpected shock at the height of it’s powers that lets it know it is not invulnerable, after all. [The Vietnam War was not an anomaly.] Each power reacts similarly—a reactionary politics of denial sets in for a period of several decades, during which the elites do better than ever, while the majority of people see their fortunes either stagnate, or decline. Finally, in each case, after several decades, an egalitarian reversal sets in.

Reflecting on some of the previous cycles, Phillips wrote:

[T]he popular reactions in mid-eighteenth-century Holland and early-twentieth-century Britain against opulent aristocratic and financial elites raise a different possibility: the emergence during the first third of the twenty-first century of a U.S. radicalism seeded by economic and political pessimism. We have seen how a portion of the Dutch people, seeking a return to lost values, mounted a “Patriot Revolution.” Major elements of the British population, seething against wealth and unfairness, used the new Labor Party to build a British welfare state-worker and lower-middle-income circumstances improved markedly-around the much higher tax rates imposed by war and politics on the upper and upper middle classes.

It’s ironic that Phillips, once the chief architect of Nixon’s infamous “Southern Strategy” was so far left of both party establishments by 2002. If America does not follow the same trajectory—or does so with significantly greater difficulty—one reason will surely be because of America’s much higher degree of racial fragmentation, which Phillips himself helped make so toxic in his youth. This racial fragmentation has become a key fault-line for organizing a large portion of conservative threat bias.

But the question for progressives is not simply how to understand conservative’s heightened threat bias, but how to go about shaping an organized response. This task is complicated by the cultural dynamic Phillips described, since the post-Vietnam elite-favoring period has fueled a form of cultural liberalism which is tone-deaf at best and downright hostile at worst to traditional New Deal liberal economic concerns. It’s not simply neo-liberalism, which has conservative as well as liberal adherents, but a broader cultural mindset affecting everything about how one views and approaches the world. Before considering how to shape an effective response to threat bias, its useful first to consider how this post-Vietnam elite cultural liberalism has clouded our understanding, and significantly weakened the Democratic Party as well.

As stated above, threat bias (Ebola, ISIS, immigration, etc.) was GOP’s not-so-secret weapon in 2014 elections—and it worked spectacularly, particularly since Democrats responded fearfully and defensively. Kentucky U.S. Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes’ ridiculous refusal to say if she’d voted for Obama was a highlight of this sort of attitude, as was Mary Landrieu’s ludicrous efforts to be more anti-Obama than her Republican opponent.

But these were simply extreme examples of a much more pervasive pattern, which was visible in the 2010 elections as well—elections which echoed the Democrats historical losses in the 1994 mid-terms, which, like the 2010 elections, came after a rare two-year period in which Democrats controlled both the White House and both chambers of Congress. The 1994 losses went far beyond giving the GOP control of the House for the first time since 1954, they also gave the GOP the edge in controlling state legislatures, by 19 to 18—a staggering loss of power, since the Democrats had dominated state legislatures without interruption for the previous two decades. From 1971 through 1994, Democrats controlled an average of 29 state legislatures to 10 for the Republicans—an average margin of 19 [calculated from data here].