Organizers say they are confident President Obama will prove to be a strong draw for campaign dollars on his three-city tour of California and Washington, even though they have already lowered the ticket price for one San Francisco event to help ensure a packed hall.

WASHINGTON — President Obama’s ability to boost his party in a time of waning political fortunes will face a big test next week as he embarks on a West Coast fund-raising swing to help congressional Democrats stock their 2014 campaign coffers.

The quest for contributions is made all the more urgent by the bungled launch of his health care law and its use as a bludgeon by Republicans trying to seize control of the Senate.

Advertisement

Moreover, the stakes are increasing for the Democrats just as the president is getting weaker, with the lowest approval ratings of his presidency weighing him down as the midterm election cycle kicks into full gear.

Organizers say they are confident Obama will prove to be a strong draw for campaign dollars on his three-city tour of California and Washington, even though they have already lowered the ticket price for one San Francisco event to help ensure a packed hall.

Both states are operating their own relatively successful health care websites. But highlighting the potential negatives for the fund-raiser in chief: Obama is expected to get an earful from California technology executives and other contributors who are baffled that Obama’s administration has been unable to create a functioning health care website.

Even those who are giving top-dollar donations refer to it as the president’s health care “debacle.” It stands in stark contrast to the California online insurance marketplace, which is run by the state health care exchange and has helped enroll nearly 80,000 residents.

“Clearly everyone in Silicon Valley is extremely disappointed with how the Obamacare website has gone,” said Marc Benioff, chief executive of cloud computing firm Salesforce.com who is hosting an hourlong lunch for Obama at his San Francisco home on Monday.

Advertisement

“I think it will dominate the conversation. Truly, people are upset,” he said. “It will be an intense conversation.”

Chris Lehane, a San Francisco-based Democratic consultant, said there is still excitement for Obama, and there’s no shortage of money to be raised. But Obama will be hearing complaints about his signature health care law.

“These are people who have created the most sophisticated databases ever, and could probably figure this out on the elevator ride up to their office,” Lehane said. “There’s bafflement and puzzlement out here. Because this is doable.”

Obama’s approval rating in national polls has sunk to between 37 and 41 percent. Yet demands on Obama to help raise money to prepare for 2014 elections are strong. Democrats’ control of the Senate has been made more tenuous because of the furor over chronic technical problems with healthcare.gov, the insurance enrollment website for 36 states. Recognizing the hardships Americans have encountered attempting to sign up for the Affordable Care Act’s mandatory insurance, the administration Friday extended a sign-up deadline by eight days, to Dec. 23, for plans taking effect at the beginning of the year.

Outrage also has focused on cancellation of health coverage for millions of people whose old insurance plans did not meet new standards of the Affordable Care Act. Obama has sought to alleviate that pressure by saying states could permit insurers to continue to offer the substandard plans, but that has caused even more confusion and upheaval.

Moderate Democrats in states like North Carolina, Louisiana, and Alaska are already under intense television bombardment by Republicans, pillorying them for supporting the president’s signature social policy achievement.

“Mary Landrieu cast the deciding vote for Obamacare,” said an ad that began running on Wednesday in Louisiana; it is part of a $4 million national ad campaign by the conservative group Americans for Prosperity. “Why didn’t she do her job? Protect us from Obamacare from the start?”

Landrieu has been attempting to distance herself from the most troubling aspects of the Affordable Care Act. She introduced legislation that would go one step further than Obama’s reprieve on cancellations, and require insurance companies to continue coverage under plans that do not meet the law’s minimum standards. Several other potentially vulnerable Democrats have signed on.

The health care problems came on the heels of a month in which Republican actions led to the government shutdown, giving Democrats a potential political edge. That has since evaporated. “The needle has moved over the last month dramatically,’’ said Stuart Rothenberg, a political analyst who monitors House and Senate races. “The Senate is in play and the Democrats need to change this trajectory or, as we move toward November, the Senate is going to look more and more at risk.”

To capture the Senate, Republicans need to gain six seats. The Cook Political Report rates four seats that Democrats currently hold as a toss-up or leaning toward Republicans: West Virginia, Arkansas, South Dakota, and Montana.

Republicans would have to win all of those races, and then make further inroads in places like Louisiana and North Carolina.

The House is far more daunting for Democrats. Rothenberg lists 208 seats as safely Republican, meaning the GOP would have to win just 10 out of the 52 competitive races to keep its majority.

Helping fellow Democrats has been a priority for Obama, highlighting the pressures of today’s permanent campaign apparatus and the importance to his legacy of retaining Senate control. The West Coast trip follows fund-raisers held earlier this month in Dallas, Miami, and Philadelphia. He also held a fund-raiser in Weston, Mass., on Oct. 30. His western trip starts in Seattle on Sunday and ends in Los Angeles before he returns to Washington on Tuesday.

There are some signs Obama may not be able to attract the same level of campaign cash he has in the past. Organizers for one of Obama’s fund-raisers in San Francisco sent out messages this week saying ticket prices had been reduced, according to the San Francisco Chronicle.

Democratic Party officials said the price reduction was not an indication of low interest. They said they expanded the space for the fund-raiser, and offered tickets at lower prices.

Benioff has said his company would build the government’s website for free, and run it for the next five years at no cost. At a conference Benioff’s company sponsored this week, it showed off a new platform for the site, which it called Healthcare.Love.

“We demonstrated that the government doesn’t need to spend $300 million to achieve a great new success with health care,” Benioff said. “The number one message is, ‘We’re still here to be a friend and ally of the president.’ A friend in need is a friend indeed.”

Michael Czin, a spokesman for the Democratic National Committee, said the party has not had any problems raising money as a result of Obama’s sagging poll numbers.

The primary campaign committees that Obama has tried to raise money for have taken in $163 million this year, compared with $150 million for the Republican committees.

“Right now we’re making the types of investments that will help us be successful next year, whether that’s bringing on key staff or making investments in data and technology,” Czin said. “Looking to 2014, we’re going to have the resources we need to get that message out.”