State Senate candidates speak at forum

By GAIL LOWE Staff Writer

The Lampasas County Republican Club hosted a candidate forum Monday night for contested races in the March 1 GOP primary.

Marcia Wallace, president of the Republican Club, called the meeting to order with a standing room only crowd gathered at the Lampasas County Office Building conference room. Goal of the club in hosting the forum, she said, is to help inform voters.

Serving as moderator of the forum was Dan Corbin, former Killeen mayor and a CPA/ attorney.

He introduced the candidates for Senate District 24 who will be vying in the Republican primary. The winner will face Democrat candidate Jennie Lou Leeder in the November general election. State Senator Troy Fraser (R-Horseshoe Bay) is not running for re-election to the seat.

In making their brief opening statements, Dawn Buckingham of Lakeway said she desires to decrease the footprint of government and noted that “Obamacare” healthcare legislation has been particularly onerous. Brent Mayes of Fredericksburg said he has had enough of “hope and change,” and wants to fight for the rural interests of the district.

Reed Williams, who lives in Burnet County, said he is running because he is concerned about water and security issues, as well as public education. Ryan Downton of Salado termed himself an “Obamacare survivor.” He said the federal legislation killed his first company. He is running to bring business experience to government.

Susan King – who is a state representative from Abilene – said the military is a priority to her, and that she has hope for the outlook of Texas. And Jon Cobb of Bee Cave agreed Texas is in a good spot. He said he wants to make sure the state has good roads, water and schools.

Candidates were given 30 seconds to respond about what makes them most qualified for the Texas Senate seat.

Mrs. Buckingham said she has long had a passion for education and believes “God’s highest calling” is educating students.

Mayes said he brings a wealth of life experiences to the race and described his lack of political history as “a good thing.”

Williams said as a former San Antonio City Council member, he went to the “heart of the liberals and won” against them. He believes the district needs somebody with experience fighting for its values.

Downton, who served as general counsel for the Texas House during redistricting in 2012, said his experience defending the redistricting maps in court “and beating Obama” make him uniquely qualified.

Mrs. King cited her eight years on the Abilene school board and nursing background as important qualifications for the position.

Cobb, who said he was a product of a poor school district, said there is nothing government can do to improve education unless families get involved.

Candidates then were asked to name their top two priorities if elected to office.

Mayes said protecting water interests and border security go together as his top priority, followed by education. “We must save it from Common Core, C-Scope, etc.” he said of various controversial education programs.

Williams cited term limits as his top legislative objective. He said voters “can’t get [bad] people out” after they are elected. He also would seek to protect property rights, which he said includes both water rights and eminent domain rights.

Downton said education and water are his top two issues. “Common Core is still in our schools,” he said, despite some state regulations against it.

Mrs. King named military infrastructure and valuing veterans as her top priority. She also mentioned public education as a priority. “We must make kids workforce ready,” she said.

Cobb said water rights are his top priority and said that goes along with border security. “We must build a wall on the border to protect Texas,” he said.

Mrs. Buckingham said “border security is national security.” She believes Texas should seal the borders and get rid of sanctuary cities. She added that governmentshouldbe“grassroots up,” and she wants district voters to be in touch with her office.

The next question asked by the forum moderator related to the state budget. With the biennial budget based on oil selling for $63 per barrel, Corbin asked candidates to enumerate what they thought should be done to make up for the shortfall, given the drop in oil prices.

Williams, who noted that oil has fallen below $32 per barrel, said the state needs to cut back right now “on things we don’t need.” The situation won’t get better and can’t wait for a subsequent legislative session, he said.

Downton said the state needs to move to zero-based budgeting and “justify every dollar,” rather than to base the budget off previous spending levels. He also said Texas should get rid of obsolete state agencies.

Mrs. King said the state has a $9 billion Rainy Day Fund that can be utilized as an emergency cushion against declining revenues. And the state must “keep the budget tight,” she added.

Cobb agreed the state probably would have to use some of what is set aside in the Rainy Day Fund, but Texas “needs to put a fear of losing their job in state employees” as the state can’t “guarantee their employment forever.”

Mrs. Buckingham said the answer is to reduce the size of government, while Mayes acknowledged that the Rainy Day Fund would have to be utilized because legislators “won’t cut back” on spending. “We need new folks there,” he added.

Candidates also were asked what they would do to strengthen education, and to comment on the role of public education, private schools, home schools and charter schools.

Downton said the legislature must put some “teeth” into rules on Common Core and that the use of property taxes to support public education must be examined, as “property taxes are too high.”

Mrs. King acknowledged a need for home schools, private and public schools as well as charter schools, as “no one type is best.” But she believes public-funded vouchers to pay for education choice “have lots of issues.”

Cobb said Senate District 24 has good schools. He thinks there is a difference, however, between rural schools and urban schools. “We can’t make kids attend failing schools,” he said. Cobb also does not think state money should go toward home schooling.

Mrs. Buckingham said some students are forced to attend schools that are crumbling. Texas needs to “ empower parents” to make education choices, she said.

Mayes reiterated his opposition to the infiltration of federal Common Core standards into Texas classrooms and said the “legislature has given up on it.” Parents should have the right to home school their students, he said.

Williams said the state needs to return authority to the local level and give school districts the power to make their own decisions.

The Republican state senatorial candidates all seemed to agree that border security is a problem in Texas and that the federal government is not doing enough to protect citizens.

Mrs. King said putting Border Patrol agents on the border is not enough, that Texas needs cooperation from the federal government.

Cobb said it is time for Texas to do something about a wall and that the state “needs men there” on the ground to secure the border.

Mrs. Buckingham said “a wall doesn’t really stop them.” The use of National Guard is crucial, she added.

Mayes and Downton both said the E-verify system should be made mandatory, and that the state should eliminate sanctuary cities. Mayes added that Texas should revoke in-state tuition for students who are here illegally.

Williams quipped that the way to handle border security is to elect a Republican president. He also said the use of technology is critical, as reliance on “highway patrolmen is not working.”

Candidates finished their portion of the forum with brief closing statements for the audience.

Early voting begins Feb. 16 and runs through Feb. 26. The primary election is set for March 1.

***

The forum also included Republican candidates for the Texas House District 54 seat, held by Jimmie Don Aycock (R-Killeen) who is not running for re-election; the Precinct 1 Lampasas County commissioner post held by Robert Vincent, who is not seeking re-election; and the Precinct 2&3 constable race.

A story featuring the candidates’ responses on issues pertinent to those elected positions will run in an upcoming edition of the Dispatch Record.