New York Assembly members meet at the Capitol in Albany, N.Y., on Monday, June 15, 2015. Tim Roske/Associated Press

New York is poised to become the first state to allow women who become pregnant to sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act – even after the open-enrollment period has passed.

Legislation establishing a pregnancy as a so-called qualifying event that enables women to enroll in ACA health coverage at any time passed the New York legislature on Wednesday, and was sent to Gov. Andrew Cuomo for his signature.

Dani Lever, a spokeswoman for the governor, said the bill is under review.

“Legislatures will be under tremendous pressure to follow New York,” said New York City Comptroller Scott Stringer. “We can’t wait for the federal government to act. The fact New York did this his will go a long way of changing the law in many states.”

He said New York will reach out to other state legislatures in states that run their own exchange to inform them of the need to take similar steps.

Health care advocacy groups haven’t so far been unsuccessful in getting the Obama administration to allow uninsured women to obtain health coverage on the federal exchange. Currently, women can sign up for coverage as a qualifying event if they have a baby, but not when they become pregnant.

The New York legislation would allow women in the state who become pregnant to apply for insurance at any time. Health advocates have said the change is needed to enable women to get prenatal care

In California lawmakers are weighing legislation that would make pregnancy an event that would qualify women to sign up for coverage outside of the health law’s open enrollment season.

California Sens. Dianne Feinstein and Barbara Boxer, both Democrats, have supported the measure and in March wrote to the state exchange encouraging the director to allow pregnant women to obtain health insurance.

Gov. Jerry Brown’s office referred questions to the state exchange, Covered California. An exchange spokesman said it was monitoring the legislation and doesn’t have the legal authority to make the change unless the legislature acts.

Health insurers have pushed back against such a change because they’re concerned it would provide an incentive for women to sign up for coverage only when they become pregnant and need care. They have said that would make coverage more expensive for consumers.