The 23rd annual Sioux Falls Parade of Lights kicks off the holiday season Friday night in downtown Sioux Falls. Follow Jared Ransom as he live tweets from the parade.

Starting at 7:30 p.m., lighted holiday floats will start at 14th Street and travel down Phillips Avenue to 5th Avenue.

Watch Live: KELOLAND News will be livestreaming from in front of the KELO-TV studios at 13th Street and Phillips Avenue.

Parking is free at all downtown Sioux Falls parking ramps beginning at 5 p.m. For more information, visit the Downtown Sioux Falls website.

Following the parade, an awards ceremony will be hosted by the Holiday Inn City Centre. Cookies and cider will be provided, along with an opportunity to enter a prize drawing. The following awards will be named:

CenturyLink Best Use of Lights: This award is given to the float that shows the most ingenuity and engineering in light usage and special effects for visual appeal. This year, the winner will receive a tech gift basket from CenturyLink in addition to the trophy.



This award is given to the float that shows the most ingenuity and engineering in light usage and special effects for visual appeal. This year, the winner will receive a tech gift basket from CenturyLink in addition to the trophy. Best Workmanship: This award is given to the float that displays outstanding craftsmanship, neatness, attention to detail, overall design and usage of color and materials.



This award is given to the float that displays outstanding craftsmanship, neatness, attention to detail, overall design and usage of color and materials. Spirit of Sioux Falls: This award is for the float exhibiting the most public appeal and charm, most creatively pleasing the crowd.



This award is for the float exhibiting the most public appeal and charm, most creatively pleasing the crowd. Mayor’s Choice: This award is given to the personal favorite of Sioux Falls Mayor (this year, represented by Councilor Karsky).



This award is given to the personal favorite of Sioux Falls Mayor (this year, represented by Councilor Karsky). Downtown Sioux Falls Award: This award is given to the favorite of DTSF board.