Childers (Photo: Rachael Spiegel)

Former U.S. Rep Travis Childers is trying to become the first Democratic U.S. senator from Mississippi since the 1980s.

He defeated three opponents in Tuesday’s Democratic primary. The question now is whether Childers can win in November against a Republican.

“I do realize people may have more money to spend than I do, but no one will out-work me,” Childers said Tuesday in a phone interview as he traveled to Jackson following campaign stops in the Mississippi Delta.

Childers is laying the groundwork for why he believes his message will resonate with voters in the November general election.

“First of all, the people of Washington, D.C., have forgot the working folks,” Childers said. “They bicker and fight and look for reasons to disagree. Washington isn’t working. I’m ready to reach across the aisle.”

Childers said he is a small business owner and knows the issues facing small businesses. He said they are getting lost in the system.

“Travis Childers represents the best opportunity Democrats have had to win a U.S. Senate seat in Mississippi in a generation,” said Mississippi Democratic Party Chairman Rickey Cole. “We have to work hard to introduce him to the voters in the three-fourths of the state where he has never been a candidate. I believe his down-home, common sense approach to government, his humility and his passion to serve the people will connect with the voters we need in order to win. Off-year elections are about voter turnout, and we are working on a 21st century get-out-the-vote effort in every precinct.”

Childers’ goal is to become better known south of Jackson. He said his campaign will focus on spending more time in the southern part of the state.

There hasn’t been a Democratic U.S. senator since the late John C. Stennis retired in 1989. Prior to that, the late Jim Eastland, a conservative Democrat, retired in 1978.

Childers said some may see him as a populist candidate, not necessarily a bad thing. A populist is described as a member of a political party claiming to represent common people.

“We are hardworking people in Mississippi,” Childers said. He said he’s been working since he was 16.

Childers said he supports job creation, increasing the minimum wage and is a strong advocate for public education. He said he attended public school and attended college on Pell grants. His two daughters attended public school. If elected to the U.S. Senate, Childers said his platform will include keeping Social Security and Medicaid strong.

But Childers doesn’t see himself as a traditional Democrat.

When he was in Congress, he voted against the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare. He opposed any ban on the right to carry firearms, and he believes marriage should be between a man and woman.

Childers was a former member of the Blue Dog Coalition, a group of fiscally conservative House Democrats. He and several other members were defeated in re-election bids in 2010.

Childers said he voted against the Affordable Care Act because he was concerned about the health care bill’s cost and the “absence of sufficiently strong language to prohibit federal funding for abortion.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.hattiesburgamerican.com/story/news/2014/06/03/travis-childers-looks-ahead-november/9938871/