More than a quarter-million, low-income families in Tennessee have children 8 years old or younger. Of those families, more than four out of five don’t have a parent with a two- or four-year college degree, according to the Annie E. Casey Foundation. (Photo: Thinkstock.com )

In 2012, there were more than a quarter-million, low-income Tennessee families with children 8 years old or younger. Of those families — identified as a home with kids and a married couple, cohabiting couple or grandparents — more than eight in 10 didn’t have a parent with any sort of college degree.

These figures show the need for the state, and the country, to continue to create policies and programs that give low-income families a chance to succeed, argues the Annie E. Casey Foundation in its latest Kids Count report.

Linda O’Neal, executive director of the Tennessee Commission on Children and Youth, echoes the findings of the national child advocacy foundation. She said the report again illustrates the need for Tennessee to link programs that prepare parents for the job market with programs that help with early childhood development.

“There are ways to improve outcomes for low-income families by better coordination of existing resources,” O’Neal said.

The report notes the United Way of the Bay Area in California is working to connect parents with financial coaching and job-readiness assistance through their community schools. The foundation also recommends creating some sort of public incentive for community colleges and businesses that partner to create opportunities for young parents to learn and provide their children with quality early education programing.

The commission applauds the Tennessee Promise scholarship program, which offers tuition-free community college to eligible high school seniors in Tennessee, saying it has the ability to drastically help young families in the future. Right now though, the report and the commission argue there needs to be more stable funding for family resource centers and child care programs.

About 20 percent of the 263,000 Tennessee children 5 years old or younger have parents who say child care issues affect their employment, according to the Casey report. Roughly the same percentage report a fear that their children face developmental delays because of their income or employment status.

While public funding and the impetus for lawmakers to act will remain an issue, O’Neal pointed to a few things the private sector can do to help. Specifically, she mentioned advanced scheduling. It might seem simple, but a regular schedule or sufficient advanced notice of a schedule is a big deal to a parent who needs to coordinate child care. O’Neal said Starbucks recently changed its scheduling policy to make it more accommodating, and retail giant Costco already offers schedules in advance.

At the heart of these problems in Tennessee are two focus areas the commission and O’Neal repeatedly stress: the need for universal prekindergarten and the need to expand Medicaid eligibility. O’Neal champions the effectiveness of prekindergarten programing, as do dozens of professors and experts. Many signed an open letter recently, including two from Vanderbilt University, advocating for more investment in early childhood education.

While Gov. Bill Haslam recently submitted an application for nearly $70 million in pre-k funding, the administration did so on behalf of Nashville and Shelby County schools. Haslam has said he’ll examine the possibility of expanded pre-k at some point; some Republicans in the legislature question its efficacy and cost.

O’Neal thanked the governor for allowing the application, calling it a step in the right direction. However, she said she recognized the chances for any expansion in the upcoming legislative session are slim. Finding a compromise on Medicaid expansion, a component of the controversial Affordable Care Act, is more likely.

Regardless of Medicaid or pre-k expansion, O’Neal argued the state needs to find some way to invest more in early childhood programs and education initiatives for adults.

“I think that Tennessee is perhaps rightfully proud of having a low tax structure, of being a low tax state, but unfortunately we get what we pay for. And sometimes what we don’t have is the investments in children that help,” O’Neal said.

The federal Department of Education is expected to announce the winners of the federal pre-k grant funding sometime before the end of the year.

Reach Dave Boucher at 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1unj5fJ