Many natural-born United States citizens often cross state lines to attend universities and pay out-of-state tuition.

Those in favor of repealing the Texas Dream Act said undocumented students should adhere to same guidelines as those who are not permanent Texas residents.



State Sen. Lois Kolkhorst, R-Brenham, said she and incoming Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick are working together to fully repeal the Texas Dream Act and are drafting a new bill to bring forth in the upcoming session.

"We have to be sensitive to the citizens of our state," Kolkhorst said. "If people come from other states, they pay more tuition. Even if a student moves out of the state and doesn't establish residency in time, they pay more."

Kolkhorst said undocumented students qualifying for in-state tuition causes inconsistency because they are not permanent Texas residents.



"The general public is extremely concerned," she said. "If there's one seat left, for example, at UT, who should get that in-state tuition? Texas taxpayers are giving the money for universities. They should be a priority."

Victoria resident Wendy Hughes said she had to pay out-of-state tuition when attending a university in Georgia and sees it as reasonable that undocumented students do the same.



"I maintained Texas state residency, so I was required to pay out-of-state. At that time, it was double," she said. "If someone moves from a different state, they still live here in Texas but have to pay out-of-state. I think someone undocumented or illegal should not get in-state tuition just because they live in Texas."

Hughes said a complete repeal of the Texas Dream Act would ensure equality for all who attend college.

"If you're going to force a United States citizen to pay out-of-state, like a student from Louisiana to attend school in Texas, I think you should do the same for those who cannot prove residency."

Port Lavaca real estate investor Russel Cain said while the cost of education for undocumented students could increase, it would be fair for everyone.



"When I went to college, I worked and made my own money and appreciated it," he said. "If you want a college education, it's up to you to go out and get it."

Cain said as a taxpayer, he does not believe he should assist those who are illegally in the country with an education.



"I don't want to be your ticket to get an education. You need to get your residency first, then attend college if you can't afford" to go paying out-of-state tuition, he said. "It's not fair to taxpayers. I am all for immigration, but it has to be done correctly."

Kolkhorst said the Texas Dream Act was not the sole piece of legislation up for modification.

She said revamping bills are a "healthy process" and done every two years.

"I'm one of the freshest off the campaign trail, so I've been listening to people," she said. "This is not a Democratic or Republican issue; it's a state of Texas issue."

In 2001, Kolkhorst voted in favor of The Texas Dream Act, but she said more than a decade later, times have changed.

"There have been significant changes on how to secure our border," she said. "If we had a secured border this wouldn't be a problem, but the federal government has chosen not to secure our border."

Kolkhorst said she acknowledges repealing the act may cause difficulties for undocumented students pursuing a college education.

"This is a double-edged sword," she said. "Although it's a very small group, it has risen to the degree of concern for citizens. We are certainly listening to the those that this would cause hardship, but we have universities that are affordable, even when not in-state (tuition)."

SHARE