The Eye

Tyga SLAMS Drake In New Interview Amid Feud: 'Rack City' Rapper Calls Rihanna's Ex A 'Weirdo' [WATCH]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Rochelle Brodin) Tyga's team warned the rapper to stay away from 17-year-old Kylie Jenner.

Tyga may have made headlines earlier this week for the drama surrounding his alleged relationship with Kylie Jenner, however, the "Rack City" rapper is creating even more heat by slamming Drake yet again in a new interview with Hot 97.



Hollywood Life reports that the 25-year-old calls Drake a "weirdo" in a new interview, insinuating that once the "Take Care" rapper hit fame, he became a "totally different person."



When asked in the interview about his ongoing beef with the Canadian rapper, Tyga replied:



"Chris [Brown] is a genuine person that's just a good friend. The industry is so fake and half of these rappers is just weirdos. Everyone get money and they get this clout and fame and it turns them into a totally different person. It's just about being genuine. Most people do s*** like that to get publicity and I'm not doing it to get no publicity. I'm not out here going to the radio to say 'f*** Drake,' and doing all that because I ain't thirsty. As a man, I'm going to say how I feel about him as a person because I know him personally."



Drake and Tyga's feud began last year in October after Tyga's Vibe interview revealed that he didn't "like Drake as a person," adding, "He's just fake to me."



In response, Drake recently released his mixtape titled, "If You're Reading This, It's Too Late," calling out the rapper for dating a much younger Kylie Jenner, rapping, "You need to act your age and not your girl's age."



Tyga most recently fired back at Drake, calling him out on Twitter with, "u still a b--ch."



Watch the preview clip below!







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.