GALLIPOLIS— Holzer Health System has announced that a reduction in force will be occurring throughout its locations in southern Ohio and western West Virginia.The reduction will result in the elimination of approximately 100 positions in mostly non-direct patient care positions.

When asked how many jobs would be reduced in Jackson County, officials said it was undetermined as of Monday afternoon.

Employee notifications began on October 26, and will continue through Friday, October 30. Understanding the difficulty of this situation, Holzer officials said that they are committed to the support of employees through this difficult career transition. Separation pay and outplacement services, including job placement assistance and career support will be provided to all of the dedicated and loyal employees affected.

“Holzer Health System remains committed to the health and wellbeing of the residents of southern Ohio and western West Virginia,” Holzer Health System CEO Christopher T. Meyer, D.O. said. “It is the hope of all involved in this difficult decision that the community hospital that provided for the healthcare needs of the region since 1910 will continue its legacy of excellent patient-centered care for future generations.”

In their release, officials stated that the delivery of high quality, patient-centered care remains its top priority. “The organization will continue to meet or exceed national safety standards for staff-patient ratios as it manages this difficult transition,” Holzer claimed.

Holzer claims that when the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was enacted in March of 2010 it resulted in a dramatic change in healthcare service delivery models. “Inpatient volumes continue to shrink while outpatient volumes are rising. Reduced Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements further complicate the issue. Approximately 65 percent of Holzer’s patients are covered by government insurance. The shift in service delivery and funding cuts are realities for hospitals across the United States. The situation is uniquely more challenging for health systems in rural communities,” Holzer said in their release.

“Our entire staff works tirelessly to reduce operational costs and to streamline operations, while continuing to provide excellent care to our patients,” said Meyer. “While these efforts helped us to maintain our not-for-profit community hospital system, unfortunately, it has not been enough to address the sweeping changes in the healthcare environment. This national situation placed us in a regrettable position. We must now take additional action to ensure the long-term financial health and stability of Holzer so that we may continue providing the excellent health care our patients deserve for many years to come.”

Holzer Health System said that they have been actively reducing operational expenditures, eliminating duplication of services resulting from a merger in 2012, divesting excess property holdings, and renegotiating supply contracts. “As is being experienced by health systems throughout the country, inpatient service volumes decreased nearly 15 percent while reimbursement for services continues to decline, and cost of care delivery continues to rise. Operational expenses in the most recent fiscal year exceeded revenues by more than $1.2 million resulting in the unmanageable decline in revenue necessitating a reduction in force,” Holzer explained in their release.

Holzer Health System said that they demonstrate excellence and exceed national standards despite the challenging economic environment. During the most recent year, the system received the following national awards and recognitions:

• Nationally Recognized among Top 5% in the Nation for Joint Replacement – Healthgrades

• Named one of Healthgrades America’s 100 Best Hospitals for Joint ReplacementTM in 2015.

• National Quality Award – American Health Care Association National Center for Assisted Living

A not-for-profit entity, Holzer Health System is a regional health system consisting of two hospital locations in Gallipolis and Jackson. It has 15 clinical locations, a dental care facility, multiple long-term care entities which include senior care and assisted living establishments in Jackson and Gallipolis. There are over 160 providers and more than 30 medical specialties. The system contains numerous specialized services including Holzer Center for Cancer Care, Holzer Cardiovascular Institute, Holzer Weight Loss Solutions, Holzer Center for Joint Replacement, and Holzer Wound Care and receives more than 500,000 patient visits each year.