A hatter, a multi-media artist and a glass blower among those to exhibit wares at Art in the Park

Christine Nossoughi talks Tuesday in her Loveland studio about the process she uses while making art with concrete. Her art will be on display at Art in the Park this year. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

As Christine Nossoughi walks around her studio, a blue and gold macaw wanders in, grips the back legs of the chair with his beak, and starts ascending.

"He's coming to visit," artist Christine Nossoughi says fondly. "He has been an inspiration (lately) for my colors." She points to the brilliant blue, gold and green splashed across some of her wall hangings.

The bird was a rescue about six months ago and now belongs to her daughter.

Nossoughi of Loveland will be exhibiting her unique multimedia wall hangings at the 49th annual Art in the Park this weekend on Saturday and Sunday along with other artists such as Dan Daggett with his glass blowing demonstrations, and The Madd Hatter, fashioner of exquisite hats.

Nossoughi's studio is a bevy of mixed media. She has the head of a magnificent bronze horse mounted on a stand, a painting of a parrot in flight and her most recent work, panels of artistic concrete mounted on the walls.

Nossoughi is a sculptor but has been experimenting with different recipes for lightweight and sturdy outdoor wall art made of a mix of concrete, polymer and polystyrene materials.

The artist was originally advised against moving to Loveland because her art career was booming in New York City. She studied bronze sculpture in New York City and Europe. She was even accepted two two different private art academies.

"I didn't know this (Loveland) was the sculpture capital of the country," she said.

Advertisement

Nossoughi just wanted to have horses and dogs again and raise her three daughters, all in one environment. They moved to Loveland in 1999.

She participated in the Loveland Sculpture Invitational a couple of times in 2000-2002, and even designed a piece after 9/11 for President George Bush called, "In God We Trust."

Life happened and she dealt with other issues, like an injury that resulted in a double fusion in her neck.

While she was injured, she took classes to be an interior designer, and she started doing some decorate concrete pieces, since she couldn't sculpt like she used to.

"I said, 'Concrete is my new canvas,'" she said. "I would do a thin overlay on a patio surface, then do the stain. I fell in love with it."

She experimented with various mixes, and realized she could also do lightweight wall hangings that were durable enough for the patio.

"It has been an evolutionary journey," Nossoughi said. "I just loving the technology and what you can do."

Mary Rugg, or The Madd Hatter, of Larkspur, put Loveland on the schedule this year as well. She has been a vendor at the Colorado Renaissance Festival for 32 years and also designed hats for the mad hatter shop at Disneyland for 12 years.

"This is my first time at Art in the Park," she said. "It has gone on forever but I just usually have other events."

She travels with a group of ladies, who all chose to come to Loveland this year — Linda Drake with Linda Drake Designs, Chaucy with Chaucy's Pottery and Peggy Kutila with everything made out of ties (purses, headbands, jewelry).

Rugg uses old lace, antique flowers, feathers, garlands and floral designs to make beautiful hats.

And Dan Daggett with Daggett Glass Studios, who has had a booth at Art in the Park for the last 15 years, will be setting up his equipment at the show for the first time to do glass blowing demonstrations onsite. His area will be fenced off just east of the bathrooms.

"I will offer lessons while I'm there if people want to make a Christmas ornament," he said.

"The show is a local show and now that they're not letting in factory-made goods, it's even better."

He said the show has always been wonderful and that Loveland is the second best small arts city in the country behind Santa Fe, N.M.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.

Logistics of parking and transportation Handicapped parking areas available near the entrances to the shows. A valid handicapped parking permit is required in this area at Taft Avenue and 29th Street. Guests are encouraged to use the free shuttle bus service from various locations around Loveland. Buses will be available to take people to the show between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. on Saturday and between 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on Sunday. Shuttles will stop at King of Glory Church, City of Loveland Service Center, Thompson Valley Towne Center, Orchards Shopping Center and Buffalo Wild Wings at Centerra.

If you go Art in the Park: 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Saturday, Aug. 8 and 10 a.m.-4 p.m. Sunday, Aug. 9, North Lake Park, 2800 N. Taft Ave. Free to attend. The event offers art and food items for purchase. Call the Lincoln Gallery at 970-663-2407 or visit www.artintheparkloveland.com/ for details. Sculpture in the Park: 9:30 a.m.-6 p.m. Saturday, Aug. 8 and 9:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Sunday, Aug. 9, at Benson Park Sculpture Garden, 2908 Aspen Drive. General admission is $7 and ages 14 and under are free. A private patron party is Friday night with a ticket cost of $75. George Walbye will be doing a presentation about the history of the show at 6 p.m. Thursday at the Loveland Museum/Gallery as artists check in, also open to the public, 503 N. Lincoln Ave. Call the Loveland High Plains Arts Council office at 970-663-2940 or visit http://www.sculptureinthepark.org/ for details. Loveland Fine Art and Wine Invitational: 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Friday and Saturday and 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Sunday at Owens Field southwest of Loveland High School, on the south side of 29th Street, $7 admission and children 14 and under are free. The event will have ATMs on site, food, beverages and entertainment. Contact 623-734-6526 or visit http://vermillionpromotions.com for details. Artists' Charitable Fund: 7 p.m. Saturday auction starts rain or shine, Norma & Lynn Hammond Amphitheater, Taft Avenue and 29th Street adjacent to the Loveland Fine Art and Wine Invitational. Auctioneer is sculptor George Lundeen. Enjoy sub sandwiches, beer and wine. For details, call 970-577-0509 or visit www.artistscharitablefund.org. Reporter-Herald at Art in the Park: Children are invited to come hang out with reporters from the Reporter-Herald to make origami flowers and hats out of newspaper at Art in the Park or draw Weather Kids art. A booth will be set up near the food court at noon-2 p.m. Saturday and noon-2 p.m. Sunday during Art in the Park at North Lake Park. Weather Kids drawings will be published in the Reporter-Herald in coming weeks, and photos of children making origami will be posted on the RH Facebook.