Ever since Richard Pitino took the job in the spring, all eyes have been on the 2015 recruiting class. With ample time to scout and court players, it would be the new Minnesota coach's chance to truly flex his recruiting potential for the first time.

With two verbal commitments already in pocket, the Gophers staff is off to a great start.

Point guard Kevin Dorsey, a top-100 recruit and Dupree McBrayer, a highly respected three-star combo guard have a chance to form a very impactful backcourt just one year down the road, when seniors Andre Hollins and DeAndre Mathieu will have both expired their eligibilities.

With four scholarships available, two remain.

Let's take a look at the other main targets Minnesota's staff is pursuing:

Point guards:

Jarvis Johnson: Don't be fooled into believing the Gophers have any less interest in the DeLaSalle standout now that they've landed two backcourt pieces for the class -- Minnesota still very much considers Johnson a high priority in its guard-oriented system. The Gophers have been after the local recruit, who lives practically in Minnesota's backyard, since Pitino took the job, and have only intensified their efforts. Johnson, who has lauded Pitino's style of play, has four visits arranged to Minnesota, UNLV, Wisconsin and Baylor this fall, according to his brother, Ty. He likely won't be making a decision until November.

Craig Randall:

The 6-foot-2 guard is currently transferring from his home town in Ohio to school in Phoenix for his final season. Watching his last campaign will be St. Joe's, College of Charleston, Drexel, La Salle and Northeastern along with Minnesota, who is looking at him as a potential combo guard. Randall, a great shooter with plenty of range, told Rivals' Ryan James that he plans to visit Minnesota, but nothing has been set up just yet.



Shooting guards:

KJ Walton:

Walton is the shooting guard prospect the Gophers are pursuing the most at this point of the recruiting season. The four-star recruit out of Brownsburg, Indiana is ranked at No. 100 according to Rivals and is being courted heavily by Butler and Xavier along with Minnesota. According to Rivals, the versatile offensive guard has expressed interest in visiting Dinkytown sometime soon.



Small forwards:

Chris Clarke:

The 6-foot-6 wing is currently ranked 58th in the 2015 class and only moving upward after his recruitment exploded late in the process, getting a big bump in attention in the spring. The Virginia native was in town for the EYBL event in Bloomington earlier this summer and his father, Curt Clarke, made it clear he and his son were serious about the program and the school. The super athletic Clarke narrowed his list last week, naming Iowa State, Virginia Tech, Creighton, Florida, Connecticut and Tennessee as priorities, along with the Gophers.

Kipper Nichols:

The Ohio native stands at 6-foot-6 or 6-foot-7, depending on who you ask, and possibly has room to grow still. Minnesota is very high on the long, smooth wing, along with Maryland, Northwestern, Xavier, Penn State, Nebraska, Tulane and Clemson, and the Gophers are hoping to set up an official visit with the three-star. His recruitment has grown this summer as he's demonstrated an improving jumper from distance on the AAU circuit.

Nate Grimes:

The Nevada native is transferring to Quality Education Academy this fall and told Rivals he plans to wait to sign until the spring. Sitting just outside the Rivals top 100, Grimes also has offers from Boise St, Boston College, Colorado St, Fresno St, Iowa, UMass, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon St, TCU, USC, Wichita State and West Virginia, among others. The 6-foot-7 three-star talent could potentially play some power forward as well.

Jordan Murphy:

The San Antonio native is ranked 111th nationally according to Rivals and has lots of defensive potential in his strong footwork and ability to guard spots all over the floor. In addition to Minnesota, the 6-foot-7 forward is also hearing from Baylor, Kansas State, Marquette, Maryland, Oklahoma, SMU, TCU, Texas and Texas A&M.

Tyler Kohl:

The 6-foot-5 Trenton, N.J-native seems intrigued by the Gophers, who represent the biggest program making a strong push for his services. St. Joseph's, Rhode Island, Drexel and Wagner are also involved with the physical and versatile wing, eying his ability to handle, shoot and get to the rim.

Malik Ellison:

La Salle, Maryland, Penn State, St. Joe's and Temple are also vying for the smooth 6-foot-5 Burlington wing. The three-athlete is just the type of ball handling, transition-oriented wing Minnesota head coach Richard is seeking.

Power forwards:

Alex Illikainen:

Minnesota has stayed on the Grand Rapids native like a fitted glove since Pitino and Co. took over the program a year and a half ago. The 6-foot-9 Illikainen transferred to Brewster Academy in New Hampshire for his senior season, but the Gophers appear to be no less in the game at this point. The stretch four visited California this winter, and has scheduled visits to Iowa (this weekend) and Oregon on deck. Otherwise, there are a host of other programs that have extended scholarship offers: Creighton, Indiana, Providence, Wisconsin, Texas Tech, BC, Iowa State, Maryland, Nebraska and Vanderbilt among them.

Ed Morrow:

If the Gophers land this physical forward, they'll likely have to beat out another Big Ten school. Morrow, who lives in Chicago but was born in Lincoln, has already set up a visit to Nebraska, where each of his parents attended as student athletes. Morrow, a 6-foot-7 four-star recruit with a solid face-up game is currently ranked 103rd in the nation. He has also set up visit to Iowa and has been courted by SMU, California, Creighton, Arkansas, Iowa State, UMass, Oklahoma State and Wyoming, among others.

Centers:

Jonathan Nwankwo

Minnesota could certainly use some more big man depth, especially with the status of international forward Gaston Diedhiou in doubt. As of now, it's looking as though the Gophers, who got in pretty early in Nwankwo's recruitment process are in pretty good position to secure another much-needed body in the Florida native. Adam Zagoria of Zagsblog.com reported that Nwankwo will be taking an official visit at Minnesota next weekend, before heading to Rice, Temple and Tennessee. The 6-foot-9, 245-pound center would be a great fit for Pitino's system as a back-to-the-basket guy who has a decent shot up to 10 feet out and runs the floor well.