HHS secretary faces calls to RESIGN over Obamacare web debacle

Sen. Pat Roberts demanded top Obamacare boss' head just days after a tea party challenger announced his run for the senate seat

Challenger Milton Wolf is a second-cousin to Barack Obama

Roberts has opposed Obamacare before but was never as strident about it until he faced re-election pressure

The senator was one of just two Republicans to vote in favor of HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius' confirmation in 2009



Kansas Republican Pat Roberts has been a member of Congress since 1981 and a Senator since 1997, but he's never run this hard to the right before.

On Friday he demanded the resignation of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, and his newly minted tea party challenger thinks he knows why.

Milton Wolf, a fire-breathing conservative radiologist who's also a second-cousin to Barack Obama, announced on Tuesday that he would run against Roberts in 2014 for the Republican nomination.



Three days later, Roberts released a video message saying Sebelius 'won’t shoot straight with the American people' in the face of ' systematic, profound and indisputable' problems with the online rollout of the Obamacare health insurance exchanges.



'If you think those two developments aren’t connected,' a Kansas City Star columnist wrote, 'then you probably think the Kansas Jayhawks are headed for the national championship this year – in football.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Pat Roberts, a Republican senator from Kansas, says Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius should get the axe over the Obamacare website debacle

Barack Obama's fire-breathing conservative cousin Milton Wolf claims his tea-party-fueled challenge to Roberts' re-election candidacy has Suddenly moved the senator to the right

Wolf told MailOnline that Roberts himself bears some responsibility for putting Sebelius, the former Kansas governor, in charge of introducing Obamacare to the nation.



'Of course Kathleen Sebelius should resign,' he said, 'but we wouldn't be in this mess today if it wasn't for Senator Pat Roberts himself.'

Roberts, he explained, 'provided the critical support Barack Obama needed to place Kathleen Sebelius in charge of Obamacare. ... [he] publicly endorsed Kathleen Sebelius and voted for her – twice.'

Roberts was one of just two Republican senators who voted twice to confirm Sebelius after the president nominated her in 2009 – both in committee and in a final floor vote. (The other was Maine Sen. Olympia Snowe.)

But now Roberts is singing a different tune.

'In the absence of a full repeal of Obamacare, which is my preference, we need new leadership from top to bottom,' Roberts declared. 'I am calling on the secretary to resign.'

Roberts isn't alone: Robert Gibbs, the communications guru who briefed reporters during much of President Obama's first term, said on Monday that heads should roll over Obamacare -- but stopped short of naming names

Wolf has made a name for himself with a series of Web videos in which he lambastes his more famous second-cousin for being a 'socialist' bent on turning America 'into a second-rate welfare state'

Roberts has targeted parts of the Affordable Care, including a vote in March to support a defunding effort spearheaded by Texas GOP Sen. Ted Cruz.



He voted against the law itself, and also introduced unsuccessful legislation in June that would have repealed the Obamacare insurance exchanges if they weren't ready for enrollment by October 1.

Wolf, a Kansas radiologist, could give Roberts a run for his money -- or the tea party pressure could make Roberts move further to the right in a state where conservatism wins elections

Since that date, a federal government website operating 36 of the exchanges has been plagued by problems. Millions of taxpayers haven't been able to sign up because of poor technology planning. Two HHS data crunchers told MailOnline that during its first week of operation, just 51,000 people successfully enrolled.

Robert Gibbs, the Obama White House's first press secretary, threw gasoline on the fire Monday, telling MSNBC viewers that heads should roll. He didn't specify who should get the guillotine treatment, however.

'When they get it fixed, I hope they fire some people who were in charge of making sure this thing was supposed to work,' Gibbs said. 'This is excruciatingly embarrassing for the White House​ and the Department of Health and Human Services.'



Roberts' office didn't respond to a question about whether his sudden turn against Sebelius was driven by politics.



But Wolf said in a statement that when Roberts voted to confirm Sebelius in 2009, he 'joined with the Washington insiders and other career politicians and decided to give her even more power that she used to ram through and then oversee the most disastrous government program in our lifetimes.'

'We need more senators like Ted Cruz, Rand Paul, and Mike Lee,' he added later, ,bolstering his tea party street-cred.

Star columnist Steve Kraske wrote on Friday that Roberts 'wasn't always so hard right. He was seen as more pragmatic in the ’80s and ’90s and once savaged the Kansas GOP’s rightward plunge in the late 1990s as akin to a death march.'

'Roberts these days is die-hard conservative,' he noted. 'In Kansas, that’s the only safe place to be.'

Roberts (C) chaired the Senate Intelligence Committee until Republicans lost their majority in 2007. he also serves on the Agriculture, Ethics, Finance, Rules, and Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions committees

The senator's campaign manager told Reuters last week that 'it will be pretty hard for anyone to get on the conservative side of Pat Roberts.'



Roberts told Politico in September that he was indifferent to a primary challenge from Wolf, claiming he is 'not vulnerable' and 'in a very strong position.'



'Obviously the water is fine: Anybody can enter a primary – for that matter, an election,' he said.

Wolf, 42, thinks he's up to the challenge, even while he acknowledges that he will likely need to raise $4 million by next year to mount a credible challenge to the 77-year-old senator.

'If you think that the career politicians in both parties have failed America, join us,' he says on his campaign website. 'We are building the Wolf Pack – an Army of Davids to defeat the Goliaths.'