Drop in Indiana, rise nationally could reflect evening out of rates

Shopping around on the federal exchange is particularly important for people who qualify for subsidies because the value of the tax credit is tied to the benchmark plan. (Photo: Nati Harnik/AP 2013 file photo)

WASHINGTON — Premiums for benchmark health insurance plans sold on the federal exchange in Indiana are dropping an average 13 percent next year — the biggest decline in the nation, according to the federal government.

That compares with an average 7.5 percent increase across the 37 states that use HealthCare.gov for people who aren’t offered affordable coverage through an employer.

Premiums in Indiana had been on the high side since the health insurance exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act started offering coverage in 2014.

The 13 percent average decline in the second-cheapest plan available in the “silver” tier could in part reflect an evening out of rates across the country, said Cynthia Cox, associate director of health reform and private insurance at the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation, which did its own analysis of rate changes in major cities. She found a 9 percent drop in rates in Indianapolis from 2015 to 2016.

“It could just be that the premiums in Indianapolis were higher than they needed to be in 2014,” Cox said. “Now that insurers have that experience, they’re more comfortable lowering their rates to be more competitive.”

But, Cox noted, not every area that started with high rates has seen them fall.

Rates in Anchorage, Alaska, were high in 2014 and have gone up by double digits since then. A 40-year-old nonsmoker there will pay $719 a month for a benchmark plan next year, compared with $298 in Indianapolis.

The Indiana health insurer dropping rates the most is MDwise Marketplace, which cut premiums by an average 19 percent.

The nonprofit said this summer that health care usage has been lower than anticipated since it started offering plans for the first time this year. In addition, the company expected the health of those buying insurance in 2016 to improve because Indiana’s expansion of Medicaid moved the poorest people off the individual insurance market into the government program.

The fact that exchange enrollment in parts of Indianapolis has been higher than the national average is another indication the overall pool could be healthier, a key way of keeping premiums down, Cox said.

Anthem, the insurer that covers the most Hoosiers buying plans on the exchange, is raising rates by about 4 percent on average, according to rate filings with the Indiana Department of Insurance.

Anthem customer Les Kiesel, of Haubstadt, however, said the premium for his family plan is increasing from $1,068 a month to $1,269, a 19 percent increase.

“Anthem has totally priced me out,” he said.

Kiesel, 47, said he hasn’t seen any control in insurance costs in recent years. Instead, he thinks he’s buying coverage that — because of its high deductible — protects him against only major bills, but without the low premiums that used to be available for “catastrophic” plans.

“All I am getting is peace of mind knowing that if one of my kids get leukemia or whatnot, my maximum out-of-pocket cost is going to be $13,000,” he said.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services released its analysis of premium changes as the agency gears up for open enrollment of 2016 plans to begin Sunday.

Julia Holloway, who runs the HealthCare.gov outreach and assistance program for Affiliated Service Providers of Indiana, said people have been calling for the past month to make appointments to sign up for coverage.

“They’re ready to re-enroll and looking forward to looking at some new options,” Holloway said. “There’s lots of positive feedback from people. They’re enjoying their plans, but they also like the option of being able to have choice.”

The average consumer who switched plans from 2014 to 2015 paid a lower monthly premium, according to the government.

Shopping around is particularly important for people who qualify for subsidies because the value of the tax credit is tied to the benchmark plan. That creates competition among insurers to offer lower costs.

“The flip side of that for consumers is that they may need to switch plans every year, which can be difficult for a lot of people,” Cox said.

More than 219,000 Hoosiers selected a plan through last year’s open enrollment period.

By the end of June, however, the number of Hoosiers with an active policy had fallen to 167,261. Those who dropped out could be receiving coverage through Medicaid or an employer plan, or might have stopped paying their premiums for other reasons and are uninsured.

Nearly 9 in 10 who still had exchange plans were receiving tax credits to help pay their premiums, an average subsidy of $215 a month. Credits are available to people earning up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level, which is about $95,000 for a family of four.

The federal government estimates that, nationally, nearly 8 in 10 returning customers will be able to buy coverage for less than $100 a month after tax credits.

In Marion County, a 40-year-old nonsmoker has 67 plans to choose from that range in price from $243 a month for an IU Health Plan with a $6,500 deductible, to $495 a month for an Anthem plan with a $1,000 deductible. Someone making $25,000 a year would qualify for an estimated $156 in monthly tax credits, which would make the cheapest plan $87 a month.

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1N6g1hz