SAN MATEO, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--PokitDok Inc., a cloud-based provider of solutions for the business of health, announced five new additions to its leadership team, to power its nationwide expansion: Adam Grant, Senior Vice President of Customer Success; David George, Senior Vice President, Business Development; Brandon Nosacka, Vice President of Business Development; Natalie Cann, Vice President of Marketing; and Lisa Suennen, who is joining PokitDok’s Board of Directors. These five distinguished healthcare executives are helping to drive PokitDok’s triple-digit growth this year.

“The fundamental changes in the US healthcare system have created one of the biggest entrepreneurial opportunities of our lifetime,” said Lisa Suennen, board member, PokitDok. “That’s why accomplished veterans in both technology and healthcare are flocking to digital health companies that have true technical prowess combined with a deep understanding of how to solve the healthcare market’s challenges. PokitDok is an excellent example of this combination of skills and solutions and I am delighted to join their team.”

PokitDok’s new leadership team is focused on scaling nationwide adoption of its e-commerce platform that connects consumers with more than four million health providers nationwide, by specialty, condition or provider name. Consumers can request a quote for a non-acute procedure, secure a price before they visit their health practitioner, and pay by credit card, HSA or insurance. These five healthcare veterans are building enterprise distribution channels and were behind last month’s launch of PokitDok Platform for developers, the first of its kind to enable access to real-time health data through its Application Programming Interface (API). The new leadership includes:

Adam Grant joins PokitDok as Senior Vice President of Customer Success. He is an award-winning Customer Success executive with 17 years of experience in healthcare, technology, and health IT. He comes to PokitDok from Practice Fusion, where he built and retained a customer base of more than 100,000 doctors and medical professionals using its web-based Electronic Health Records system. Previously, he was with Deloitte Consulting and Alliance Consulting Group, where his clients included Gilead Sciences, Kaiser Permanente, Novartis, PacifiCare, and Providence Health & Services. Grant holds an MS in Organizational Behavior and Entrepreneurship from Stanford University and a BA in Economics from Dartmouth College.

joins PokitDok as Senior Vice President of Customer Success. He is an award-winning Customer Success executive with 17 years of experience in healthcare, technology, and health IT. He comes to PokitDok from Practice Fusion, where he built and retained a customer base of more than 100,000 doctors and medical professionals using its web-based Electronic Health Records system. Previously, he was with Deloitte Consulting and Alliance Consulting Group, where his clients included Gilead Sciences, Kaiser Permanente, Novartis, PacifiCare, and Providence Health & Services. Grant holds an MS in Organizational Behavior and Entrepreneurship from Stanford University and a BA in Economics from Dartmouth College. David George brings 20 years of experience driving global business development, alliances, product management, and sales programs to PokitDok. As the Senior Vice President of Business Development, George plays an instrumental part in creating alliances and driving revenue across a diverse ecosystem of insurance companies, self-insured corporations, provider networks, and technology partners. His career spans senior leadership positions in business development, strategy, and product management at Microsoft, Sencha, Limelight Networks and start-ups, where he helped take companies public, developed and launched multiple SaaS and mobile product lines globally, grew revenue channels from inception to over $100 million, and created award-winning industry alliances and product marketing campaigns.

brings 20 years of experience driving global business development, alliances, product management, and sales programs to PokitDok. As the Senior Vice President of Business Development, George plays an instrumental part in creating alliances and driving revenue across a diverse ecosystem of insurance companies, self-insured corporations, provider networks, and technology partners. His career spans senior leadership positions in business development, strategy, and product management at Microsoft, Sencha, Limelight Networks and start-ups, where he helped take companies public, developed and launched multiple SaaS and mobile product lines globally, grew revenue channels from inception to over $100 million, and created award-winning industry alliances and product marketing campaigns. As Vice President of Business Development at PokitDok, Brandon Nosacka is building an affinity across the provider ecosystem. Nosacka brings 12 years of experience in the healthcare industry. Prior to PokitDok, he served as the VP of Sales at Axial Exchange, where he drove the adoption of mobile software that helps patients, physicians and other health professionals coordinate care. Before that, he joined ZocDoc as the 30 th employee, where he was ranked a top producer in sales and launched and managed five new markets across the southeast.

is building an affinity across the provider ecosystem. Nosacka brings 12 years of experience in the healthcare industry. Prior to PokitDok, he served as the VP of Sales at Axial Exchange, where he drove the adoption of mobile software that helps patients, physicians and other health professionals coordinate care. Before that, he joined ZocDoc as the 30 employee, where he was ranked a top producer in sales and launched and managed five new markets across the southeast. A 16-year veteran in digital marketing, Natalie Cann joins PokitDok as Vice President of Marketing. Recognized for her innovative growth strategies, she was recruited from WellnessFX, where she grew the customer base by 700 percent her first year. She previously managed global customer acquisition programs for top brands like American Express and Ask.com, but also maintains a track record of helping to bring successful start-ups to market, such as Marin Software. Cann holds a BS in Business Management from Brigham Young University.

joins PokitDok as Vice President of Marketing. Recognized for her innovative growth strategies, she was recruited from WellnessFX, where she grew the customer base by 700 percent her first year. She previously managed global customer acquisition programs for top brands like American Express and Ask.com, but also maintains a track record of helping to bring successful start-ups to market, such as Marin Software. Cann holds a BS in Business Management from Brigham Young University. As one of Silicon Valley’s top health and life sciences investors, Lisa Suennen joins the Board of Directors, bringing her deep domain expertise and rich network to PokitDok. Suennen is Managing Partner at Venture Valkyrie Consulting, and also writes the popular health and investing blog, Venture Valkyrie. Lisa previously spent 15 years as a founding partner of Psilos Group, a healthcare-focused venture capital firm. Prior to Psilos, Lisa held a spectrum of senior executive roles at Merit Behavioral Care, a company she helped lead from start-up to IPO to its ultimate sale. Lisa is currently a member of the Qualcomm Life Advisory Board, a member of the Dignity Health Foundation Board, an Advisor to the California Health Care Foundation Innovation Fund, and a member of the Board of Health IT company Beyond Lucid Technologies. A UC Berkeley graduate, she also teaches healthcare and venture capital classes at the UC Berkeley Haas School of Business.

Behind PokitDok’s intuitive consumer experience rests the largest health graph of information on physician, treatment, benefit, and costs and in the future, data fed from personalized medicine and social footprinting. Third party developers at payers, health systems and digital health companies who license the PokitDok Platform can build apps with integrated access to current cash and reimbursement-based prices for healthcare treatments, a rich provider directory and real-time eligibility, claims and benefits enrollment information. PokitDok’s leadership team is bringing this unprecedented capability to market and will lead its industry-wide deployment.

“Lisa, Adam, David, Brandon and Natalie are huge assets to PokitDok; they see the tremendous opportunity to transform the process of finding, receiving and paying for treatment,” said Lisa Maki, co-founder & CEO, PokitDok. “The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act introduced a sweeping set of market dynamics and our new additions have the industry and technical aptitude to execute on our vision at this historic moment in time.”

About PokitDok

Founded in 2011, PokitDok is a cloud-based platform for healthcare purchases, connecting consumers directly with practitioners in a transparent, e-commerce experience. PokitDok provides enterprise access to market driven provider, treatment and price information for Employers, Payers and Health networks seeking to reduce expenses and capture lost reimbursements. PokitDok also provides an e-commerce storefront for practitioners seeking to market their services and enable consumers to pay for treatment up front. For consumers to shop for a doctor, service or request a price quote, go to PokitDok.com or download the app on the Apple App Store or Google Play Store. PokitDok is based in San Mateo, CA and Charleston, SC and backed by New Atlantic Ventures, Rogers Venture Partners, and Subtraction Capital.