Planned Parenthood has been scrambling for days in the aftermath of the undercover video that shows their Medical Director, Dr. Deborah Nucatola, admitting to selling aborted babies’ body parts while munching on her lunch salad. Thankfully, Americans were horrified by the video and lawmakers from across the country said they would do everything they could to defund the abortion giant.

In fact, on July 15th , Speaker John Boehner said that committees in the House of Representatives would look into the grisly video.

In a statement he said, “Nothing is more precious than life, especially an unborn child. When anyone diminishes an unborn child, we are all hurt, irreversibly so. When an organization monetizes an unborn child – and with the cavalier attitude portrayed in this horrific video – we must all act. As a start, I have asked our relevant committees to look into this matter. I am also calling on President Obama and Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell to denounce, and stop, these gruesome practices.”

SIGN THE PETITION! Congress Must Investigate Planned Parenthood for Selling Aborted Baby Parts

Additionally, some presidential candidates, including Bobby Jindal, Ted Cruz, and Jeb Bush called on Congress to investigate Planned Parenthood’s abortion business and halt funding immediately. Now Dr. Ben Carson has done the same and has even started an online petition .

Here’s his petition:

“I, like many of you, was sickened when I saw the video of Dr. Deborah Nucatola of Planned Parenthood secretly video taped discussing selling aborted babyparts. I was more than sickened, I was enraged. ( Click link to view the film .) Congress must act NOW! Please sign my petition to Congress demanding that they stop all public funds to Planned Parenthood. I spent my whole life caring for children. What I see in this video is barbaric. Congress must ACT! We the undersigned insist that our tax dollars not be used in any way with Planned Parenthood in light of their Baby Organ Harvesting Programs. Please act immediately to stop the transfer of federal dollars to Planned Parenthood.”

Then, on Twitter, Dr. Carson asked his followers to support him in his efforts to expose and help defund Planned Parenthood. View some of his tweets below.

#PlannedParenthood and their enablers must be stopped from these barbaric practices. #HealInspireRevive — Dr. Ben Carson (@RealBenCarson) July 14, 2015

I’m urging #Congress to eliminate every last dime of #PlannedParenthood funding! Join me, sign the petition here: https://t.co/alZGjf8BE2 — Dr. Ben Carson (@RealBenCarson) July 15, 2015

Defend mothers & precious lives in their wombs, not #PlannedParenthood‘s woeful acts of amorality #HealInspireRevive https://t.co/CZSadeRYEp — Dr. Ben Carson (@RealBenCarson) July 17, 2015

SIGN THE PETITION! Congress Must De-Fund Planned Parenthood Immediately

As LifeNews previously reported, Dr. Carson is a retired brain surgeon who has written eight books including a few New York Times best sellers about his work in medicine. He is also 100% pro-life and has been very vocal about his opposition for Obamacare.