U.S. Rep. Todd Young, R-Ind. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite/AP 2013 file photo)

WASHINGTON — The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is jumping into the Republican primary for Indiana's Senate seat, backing Rep. Todd Young over Rep. Marlin Stutzman.

The business group is starting an ad campaign praising Young that will run through the May 3 primary. Local and national Chamber officials will hold a news conference with the Bloomington Republican on Wednesday.

The Chamber’s new ad marks the group’s first involvement in a Senate primary this year, signifying the importance of the race.

“The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is all in for Todd Young,” spokeswoman Erica Flint said in an email. She said the ad is part of the Chamber’s push to provide early support for “effective, pro-growth conservatives who are laser-focused on governing.”

Nathan Gonzales, editor and publisher of The Rothenberg & Gonzales Political Report, a nonpartisan newsletter that tracks congressional races, said the Chamber’s involvement is significant because the group is boosting the candidate — Young — who already has the financial advantage.

“The lack of support for Stutzman so far has also been telling,” Gonzales said. Although the conservative Club for Growth endorsed Stutzman early, the group has yet to run ads on his behalf, he noted.

The Chamber’s involvement is also an example of how the race is increasingly a battle between traditional elements of the GOP establishment, including the business community, and outside groups such as the Club for Growth that have been challenging the establishment.

“Right now, Indiana is the Senate race where the clear battle lines have been drawn,” Gonzales said.

That was the same dynamic in Indiana’s last competitive Senate primary, when Sen. Richard Lugar was defeated in 2012. Lugar’s backers included the Chamber of Commerce, while he was opposed by the Club for Growth and the tea party group FreedomWorks, which also has backed Stutzman.

The 2012 race was primarily a referendum on Lugar, who opponents argued was too moderate. This year’s contest is less about conservative credentials and more about style.

U.S. Rep. Marlin Stutzman, R-Ind. (Photo: Provided 2010 file photo)

Stutzman, R-Howe, says the establishment is trying to crush his campaign because he voted against John Boehner continuing as speaker of the House last year.

“The establishment knows … that I don’t 'fall in line’ when it comes time to vote,” Stutzman said in a fundraising email Monday.

On the 20 votes most important to the Chamber last year, Stutzman voted against the group’s position seven times. Young did so four times.

Both voted against the Chamber on a temporary bill to keep the government funded, a two-year budget and debt ceiling agreement and the final version of the bill funding the government through September. They also opposed continuing the Export-Import Bank, which helps finance international sales by offering low-cost loans to foreign buyers or guarantees and credit insurance against potential losses.

Stutzman also voted against a rewrite of K-12 education policy, continuing assistance programs for workers displaced by trade and a cybersecurity bill to push companies to share computer network information with federal investigators to help thwart hackers.

The Chamber’s new ad doesn’t mention any of those issues.

Instead, it calls Young a “rock-ribbed conservative” who never backs down to President Barack Obama.

“Todd Young is leading the fight to dismantle the worst parts of Obamacare,” the ad says in a reference to legislation Young authored to increase the number of hours someone must work before an employer has to offer health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. The bill passed the House last year but has not advanced in the Senate.

The ads are running on television and radio in the Indianapolis media market, as well as digitally statewide.

Stutzman estimates the Chamber is spending $500,000 on the ads. The Chamber spokeswoman declined to state the amount, which will be disclosed later to the Federal Election Commission.

An outside group with ties to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., last week launched ads praising Young’s record on national security issues.

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1MNOMEU