Voters in District 23 this election year face a clear choice between a high-profile Democratic congresswoman who strenuously promotes Obamacare and a Republican challenger who warns that the new health care law will "destroy the American economy."

While U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz calls for more spending on education and road-building to prod the economy, Joe Kaufman wants to whack the corporate tax rate and cut federal spending.

She is resolutely liberal. He is stoutly conservative. She is chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee. He has been on the Broward Republican Executive Committee for 20 years.

They are running in a Democrat-dominated district — including Weston, Plantation, Hollywood, Davie and Miami Beach — that cast 62 percent of its ballots for Barack Obama in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections.

Wasserman Schultz, 48, of Weston, says she's not taking re-election for granted. If sent back to Congress for a sixth term, she wants to raise the minimum wage, make it easier to pay for college, enforce laws that prohibit pay discrimination and give tax incentives to overseas manufacturers to return to the United States.

"We need to make people feel like they are standing on firmer ground," she said. "People are glad we've made progress but want to feel more confidence."

Kaufman, 44, of Tamarac, tells voters he wants to step up oil drilling and replace Obamacare with state-run insurance pools while requiring hospitals and physicians to advertise their prices to help consumers restrain costs. He proposes to "banish the current tax code" and replace it with a "flatter/fairer/simpler tax system that treats all Americans equally and fairly."

In an interview, Kaufman accused Wasserman Schultz of being a polarizing figure who represents a minority of far-left Democrats. He acknowledged that his conservatism does not reflect the district, but said:

"While I may have an R next to my name, I don't want [voters] to think that they're going to wind up putting an enemy in Congress. I am going to be someone who works for all of the people in the district, whether they are from the far left, far right or anything in between."

The election will test Republican attempts to undermine one of the nation's leading Democrats.

Wgibson@Tribune.com, 202-824-8256

Joe Kaufman

Age: 44

Family: Married, one child

Residence: Tamarac

Education: Bachelor's degree, University of Maryland, 1993

Occupation: Writer/researcher/lecturer

Political career: Committeeman for Broward Republican Executive Committee; co-founder of Republican Jewish Coalition in Florida; candidate for Florida House in 1998 and 2000 and for Congress in 2012.

Campaign coffers: $594,932 raised through Aug. 6

Endorsements: Radio host Mark Levin; conservative commentator Ann Coulter; former presidential candidate Herman Cain.

Debbie Wasserman Schultz

Age: 48

Family: Married, three children

Residence: Weston

Education: Bachelor's and master's degrees, University of Florida, 1988 and 1990

Occupation: Government service

Public career: Florida House, 1992-2000; Florida Senate, 2000-04; U.S. House, 2005 to present; Chairwoman of Democratic National Committee, 2011 to present.

Campaign coffers: $1.85 million raised through Aug. 6

Endorsements: U.S. Women's Chamber of Commerce; NARAL Pro-Choice America; United Auto Workers