Buy Photo Gov. Rick Snyder, left, assists MDOT workers along Michigan Ave. near Trumbull to patch potholes Thursday, April 23, 2015 in Detroit. (Photo: Regina H. Boone DFP)Buy Photo

LANSING — Republican Gov. Rick Snyder completed his fifth year in office on Friday, and he marked the anniversary grappling with yet another contentious bill that awaits his signature and will help shape his legacy.

Snyder has called for greater campaign finance and election transparency, but among a host of provisions added to Senate Bill 571 at the last minute and never subjected to public hearings is one that would prevent school districts and other public bodies from distributing factual information about a millage request or ballot proposal, 60 days before an election.

It's already illegal for local governments and school districts to use public funds to campaign for or against a ballot proposal.

Opponents of the legislation say to also ban the dissemination of factual information is overkill and could violate free-speech rights.

Those who want Snyder to sign the bill — notably the Great Lakes Education Project, a school choice group funded by the billionaire GOP donor DeVos family, and the pro-privatization Mackinac Center for Public Policy — say so-called neutral information frequently crosses the line and the intent is to stop taxpayer-funded propaganda.

Snyder's first five years have been an endless series of such tests. What initiatives he favors that the right wing of the GOP-controlled Legislature doesn't embrace — such as Medicaid expansion and higher taxes and fees to fix the roads — can he get lawmakers to pass? What bills that are "not on his agenda" — such as right-to-work legislation, also pushed by the DeVos family — will Snyder sign under pressure? And what measures that Snyder opposes — such as allowing concealed guns in schools — will he veto, come what may?

It's impossible to predict how Snyder will decide SB 571. That says something about a non-traditional governor who Michigan native Ron Fournier of the National Journal said in a recent article seems less concerned with whether government is shrinking or expanding than with whether it is functioning better.

"Literally everything that comes to him," said Snyder's newly appointed Chief of Staff Jarrod Agen, "he analyzes it based on, is this going to be best for the people of Michigan, regardless of whether one party is backing it or the other party. He's gotten people on both sides angry with things he's done, and he's made people on both sides happy."

That's not to say Snyder isn't political. On business taxes and regulations and many bread-and-butter issues, he's a Republican through and through. On other issues, such as immigration, health care, non-business taxes and public transit — it's a little more fuzzy.

"There have been elements of what the governor has done over the past five years that are in line with how he has tried to portray himself as a nonpartisan governor and problem solver," said House Minority Leader Tim Greimel, D-Auburn Hills.

But those actions are undermined when Snyder supports legislation such as SB 571, or a bill to end straight-ticket voting, also on Snyder's desk, Greimel said. "It's these kinds of power grabs that we've seen from the Republicans ... that jeopardizes the governor leaving office with a true legacy of nonpartisanship."

Of the 38 bills Snyder has vetoed since taking office (which includes three pocket vetoes, in which a governor prevents a bill from becoming law by neither signing nor vetoing it), eight dealt with firearms, five with forest management, two with elections law, and one restricted insurance coverage for abortions.

With three years to go before he must leave office due to constitutional term limits, Snyder by any measure has gotten most of what he has wanted and little of what he hasn't.

Check marks on Snyder's to-do list include: across-the-board business tax cuts, removal of tax exemptions for pension income, reduced personal tax credits and deductions, state support of a financially restructured and resurgent Detroit as it emerged from municipal bankruptcy, and the addition of nearly 600,000 low-income Michigan residents to the Medicaid rolls under the Affordable Care Act.

Even the contentious right-to-work law was something Snyder said he supported, just not something he saw as a priority, because of its divisiveness.

Buy Photo Michigan Governor Rick Snyder, from left Canada Prime Minister Stephen Harper and Murray Howe, Gordie Howe's son, announced that the future publicly owned bridge between Windsor, Ontario and Detroit, Michigan would be named Gordie Howe international bridge during a press conference in Windsor, Canada on Thursday, May 14, 2015. (Photo: Romain Blanquart DFP)

When Snyder couldn't get legislative support for the New International Trade Crossing public bridge from Detroit to Windsor, he used executive action to get the ball rolling and persuaded the Canadian government to pick up most of the initial tab. The early stages of construction are now under way.

Though most of Snyder's wins came in his first four-year term, the $1.2-billion road funding package he signed into law in November, though it didn't represent everything he wanted, shows Snyder is still able to push through significant legislation — and get a sufficient number of reluctant Republican lawmakers to vote for tax hikes — in his lame-duck term.

"He's set his agenda and gone about completing it," said John Truscott, a Lansing public relations consultant and former press secretary to Republican Gov. John Engler who credits Snyder for managing and accelerating Michigan's economic turnaround. "In this environment, with a term-limited Legislature and starting out in a very tough economic situation, I think what he's accomplished has been remarkable."

Critics say Michigan's improved economy has more to do with the improved national economy and President Barack Obama's support for the auto industry than anything Snyder has done. And despite an unemployment rate now close to the national average, the recovery still hasn't arrived for many Michigan families.

Major outstanding issues for Snyder include fixing Detroit Public Schools, a new state energy policy, and criminal justice reforms that Snyder hopes will make a dent in Michigan's $2-billion-a-year prison budget.

But Snyder begins his sixth year in office amid the most serious crisis his administration has faced since the former computer executive and venture capitalist took office as a political neophyte in 2011.

The contamination of Flint's drinking water with lead while the city was under the control of a state-appointed emergency manager in 2014 has poisoned an unknown number of children and other residents, prompted a federal lawsuit, sparked calls for a U.S. Justice Department investigation, and led to Tuesday's resignation of Department of Environmental Quality Director Dan Wyant.

Buy Photo Governor Rick Snyder makes an announcement supporting the city of Flint switching back to the Detroit water system during a press conference on Thursday, Oct. 8, 2015. (Photo: Ryan Garza Detroit Free Press)

It's the latest and most serious in a line of agency oversight issues under Snyder — an ongoing corruption investigation at his Detroit-based Education Achievement Authority; a problem-plagued prison food contract the state eventually terminated; a state transportation department paying more than $1 million a year to lease passenger railcars it can't use; and a state housing official who resigned amid a furor over tens of thousands of dollars in travel and expense claims that included billing the state for filet mignon, escargot and pricey rum.

On Flint, Agen said the big issue going forward will be restoring trust between the state and the community and a new leadership team at DEQ and overtures by Snyder to Flint Mayor Karen Weaver and others will help with that task.

Though problems arise under all administrations, under Snyder, "people do feel like Michigan is going in the right direction," Agen said.

As Michigan awaits Snyder's decision on SB 571, Agen said transparency issues will also receive attention from Snyder in 2016 and the remainder of the governor's term.

A Center for Public Integrity/Global Integrity study released in November ranked Michigan last among the 50 states in terms of laws and other safeguards related to ethics and transparency, partly because both the governor's office and Legislature are exempt from state open records laws.

No one report is definitive on such a topic, but Michigan wants to get credit for improvements it is making and "you'll hear some talk about transparency issues as we go into next year," Agen said.

Rich Robinson, a board member at the Michigan Campaign Finance Network, which pushes for greater transparency on political fund-raising issues, said Wednesday he can't predict what Snyder will do with SB 571. But in 2013, when Snyder had a chance to veto a bill that enshrined into state law the anonymity of donors who pay for campaign "issue ads," Snyder signed it instead, Robinson recalled.

"I was just terribly, terribly disappointed."

Contact Paul Egan: 517-372-8660 or pegan@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @paulegan4.

Gov. Rick Snyder's first five years

Buy Photo Gov. Rick Snyder, left, assists MDOT workers along Michigan Ave. near Trumbull to patch potholes Thursday, April 23, 2015 in Detroit. (Photo: Regina H. Boone DFP)

Goals completed

Eliminated the Michigan Business Tax; replaced with 6% corporate tax

Began phase-out of personal property tax on manufacturing equipment

Improved Detroit's finances through a structured bankruptcy

Removed personal income tax exemptions for pension income

Reduced the Earned Income Tax Credit and Homestead Property Tax Credit, eliminated other tax credits and deductions

Medicaid expansion under Affordable Care Act

Cleared hurdles to build the New International Trade Crossing public bridge from Detroit to Windsor

Got a $1.2-billion road funding deal approved by the Legislature.

Repealed the item-pricing law and more than 2,000 business regulations

Pending/In progress

Fix Detroit Public Schools

State energy policy

Criminal justice reform

Auto insurance reform

Ethics/transparency reform

Major shortcomings

Flint drinking water crisis

Corruption at Education Achievement Authority

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1R69Lcs