Editorial

Photo:

The ACT's class of 2014 and their peers across the nation are blowing off the shackles of Year 12 and lapping up the start of schoolies' week.

While we can't and shouldn't try to stop young school leavers from having parties and enjoying themselves, we can help to keep them safe by planning.

Students should know they will have a safe place to stay, a designated non-drinking driver to get them home, or someone to call if they find themselves in trouble.

Nowadays a student's rite of passage could take them across Australia and even around the world - while Queensland remains the most popular location, some Canberrans will be heading as far away as Bali or Thailand for their end-of-school parties.

Advertisement

While Canberra does not have as pronounced a schoolie culture as NSW or Queensland, hundreds of young school leavers pepper our region's coastal areas to let off steam. Beach parties are commonplace and the combination of alcohol and water can be deadly.

In recent years, teenagers have died after falls from high-rise buildings in Queensland and Western Australia. Authorities have pleaded with students to show some restraint.

But excessive alcohol and drug consumption can go hand in hand with the annual rite of passage.

Parents need to remember that police cannot be everywhere at once, and they have a responsibility to ensure their children are fully aware of the dangers of alcohol and drugs of uncertain contents.

The death of 19-year-old Georgina Bartter at a Sydney musical festival earlier this month is a timely reminder of the danger of illicit drugs.

She suffered a rare allergic reaction and organ failure after taking one-and-a-half pills dubbed purple speakers.

Hospitals on the NSW coast are also inundated with teenagers who have consumed too much alcohol at this time of the year.

As police have reiterated time and time again, officers can't keep an eye on what people do in the privacy of their own homes.

Party-goers should also be mindful of their social media presence during the week.

Rash, off-the-cuff decisions to engage in lewd or dangerous behaviour may seem like good ideas at the time - but pictures posted online can affect careers if seen by potential employers.

The now-ex high school students should remember to stay stay safe while enjoying themselves and make memories that last a lifetime.