Topics: Brigitte Gabriel, Dana Milbank, Editor's Picks, Erick Erickson, Heritage Foundation, Islamophobia, Muslims, saba ahmed, The Right, Washington Post, News, Politics News

Thanks to Dana Milbank for attending the Heritage Foundation hatefest on Benghazi Monday so the rest of us didn’t have to. As if a higher power wanted to underscore the group’s irrelevance, the very next morning the Obama administration announced it captured the man it believes was the ringleader of the Benghazi attack.

Milbank’s column focused on the abuse suffered by Saba Ahmed, a Pakistani Muslim, when she suggested that some at the conference seemed to stereotype all Muslims as violent and anti-American. Rather unbelievably, conservatives and even some media critics are siding with Heritage and saying Milbank made the crowd look uglier than it was. Even after Media Matters released video of the clash between Ahmed and panelist Brigitte Gabriel of ACT! For America, criticism intensified.

Wow. Now that we have video http://t.co/q5vSyHmpYl I feel like @Milbank totally misrepresented the panel: http://t.co/uOc4NTCJXi — Dylan Byers (@DylanByers) June 17, 2014

You can read Milbank’s story and watch the video yourself. I think Byers and the other critics are wrong. In fact, the firestorm over Milbank’s column shows how hard even nominally mainstream reporters will work to excuse increasingly unhinged rhetoric on the right.

The conflict began when Ahmed, wearing a headscarf, took the microphone and quietly observed, “We portray Islam and all Muslims as bad, but there’s 1.8 billion followers of Islam. We have 8 million-plus Muslim Americans in this country and I don’t see them represented here.”

Now it’s true that Islamophobe Frank Gaffney played the moderate in the clash with Ahmed, thanking her for her question and reassuring her that no one on the panel “thinks that all Muslims are the problem.” Clearly Gaffney didn’t want anything to upstage his renewed charge that Hillary Clinton aide Huma Abedin has “deep personal ties” to the Muslim Brotherhood.

But Brigitte Gabriel, known for calling Muslims “barbarians,” tore into Ahmed, shrieking at her: “We are not here to bash Muslims, you were the one who brought up the issue about ‘most Muslims,’ not us.” Then she whipped the crowd into a standing ovation, asking Ahmed, “Where are the other Muslims speaking out?” She went on: “You took the limelight instead of … standing up and saying a question, asking something about our four Americans who died and what our government is doing to correct the problem, you stood there to make a point about peaceful American Muslims.”

It was bullying plain and simple, and it was ugly. It’s true that Gaffney and moderator Chris Plante treated Ahmed more gently than Gabriel did, but Gabriel deliberately channeled anti-Muslim prejudice to get the crowd to applaud her hectoring of Ahmed.

Ahmed herself (assuming it’s the same one) is a curious case. Once a Democrat, she became a Republican after losing a quixotic race for Congress in Portland, Oregon, in 2011. She wrote on her Facebook page at the time:

(M)y conservative Islamic values (pro-life, pro-family values, pro-business) made it very hard for me to defend myself as a Democrat. George Bush advocated water boarding torture just like Obama advocated drone missiles. Both parties treat Muslims badly, which is why American economy is going bankrupt fighting Islam. Inshallah, I look forward to helping foster a better understanding of our faith…