The Supreme Court will hear oral arguments today in a case that cuts to the core of women’s health, economic security and equality. In Zubik v. Burwell, the court will once again consider the question of whether an employer’s religious beliefs can trump a woman’s right to birth control coverage.

This might sound like a repeat of the Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc. case that the court decided nearly two years ago. But that's a much different case, and this time, the result should not be that women are denied the basic birth control coverage they need and deserve, as they were in the damaging Hobby Lobby decision. The court in Hobby Lobby allowed certain closely held, for-profit employers to deny women access to the no-cost birth control coverage guaranteed to them under the Affordable Care Act. In Zubik, the question is whether religiously affiliated nonprofit employers should similarly be given a license to harm their female employees in the name of religion.

But there is a big difference between these two cases: Unlike in Hobby Lobby, the employers in Zubik already can opt out of the birth control benefit.



[READ: Reconciling God With Contraception]

Under this accommodation developed by the Obama administration, an employer only has to fill out a form notifying either its insurance plan or the federal government of its objection to birth control. If an employer objects, the insurance company must provide birth control coverage directly to the employees. This guarantees a woman birth control coverage from her regular insurance company without extra costs or additional barriers, like having to sign up for a new program. In Hobby Lobby, the Supreme Court identified this very accommodation as a way the government could both respect religious beliefs and ensure women receive seamless birth control coverage.

But some nonprofit employers say the opt-out process itself violates their religious beliefs – they don’t want to even fill out a simple form – a claim eight of nine federal appeals courts have rejected. Instead, the employers propose that the government find another way to get women birth control coverage, suggesting a range of unworkable alternatives such as forcing women to seek a tax credit or deduction for birth control purchases, finding birth control manufacturers that will provide their product for free, signing up for federal programs that provide birth control or finding a new insurance plan on the exchanges set up by the Affordable Care Act.

[READ: Give All Women Abortion Coverage]

But each of these options would make it more difficult – if not impossible – for women to obtain birth control. They would separate birth control from the rest of health care, forcing women out of the system of care in which they address their other health needs. They would force women to jump hurdles – some of which could be insurmountable – to receive a service that 99 percent of sexually active women use at some point in their lives. They would force women to take on significant personal costs – monetary and otherwise – just to access birth control. These measures would reinstate the barriers that kept women from obtaining the most effective, appropriate birth control method for them – barriers the birth control benefit was designed to topple in the first place.

[OPINION: Editorial Cartoons on the Supreme Court Vacancy]

These are not hypothetical examples. At the National Women’s Law Center, we have heard from women whose employers object to covering birth control. They share frustration that, despite having health insurance, they don’t have coverage of health care that is central to their lives. They don’t understand why their employers’ religious beliefs trump their need for basic health care. They tell us the costs imposed on them mean they have to forgo the birth control method they prefer and that was recommended by their health care provider. Many of these women serve communities in need, and yet their own needs are not being met. They also tell us they are afraid to speak out for fear of losing their jobs.