Environmentalists say state officials are rushing a controversial statewide forest planning document through the public process.

Buy Photo View from inside the Henryville Tower in Clark State Forest, near Henryville, Indiana, in 2005. (Photo: THE COURIER-JOURNAL)Buy Photo

Indiana plans to increase clear-cut logging on its state forests and improve recreational facilities including at Clark State Forest near Henryville over the next five years, while looking to increase user fees, according to a proposed strategic plan that's the subject of three public meetings this week.

Environmentalists are objecting to the substance of the proposal and are calling on the Indiana Department of Natural Resources to more widely seek out public input by opening a formal 60-day comment period.

"You own these forests, not the timber industry," Jeff Stant, executive director of the Indiana Forest Alliance, wrote in a Sept. 14 letter to supporters.

The closest meeting to the Louisville metro area is about 80 miles away near Huntingburg on Wednesday.

The dates and locations of the meetings are:

6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Monday, Indiana State Museum, 650 W. Washington St., Indianapolis.

6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Tuesday, Honeywell Center, 275 W. Market St., Wabash.

6:30 to 8:30 p.m., Wednesday, Cool Springs Education Center, located off of State Road 64, about 8 miles west of Huntingburg.

The plan calls for maintaining its annual harvest of timber in state forests at 14 million board feet, while increasing clear-cutting to bring back oak-hickory forests. It says recreational facilities have not kept up with demand and calls for investing in new camping sites, wastewater treatment, trails and educational centers.

Among those areas that could see new facilities is the 24,000-acre Clark State Forest just north of Louisville, where potential new camping sites, a new shooting range, and additional horse, hiking and bike trails could draw visitors from the more than 1 million people who live in the Louisville area, the plan says.

The Forest Alliance, however, worries about too much development, new plans for user fees or gate passes, increased clear-cutting, and maintaining timber harvesting levels that have been higher than in earlier years, Stant said.

Department of Natural Resources spokesman Phil Bloom said Sunday that agency officials have held numerous meetings with a range of groups interested in state forestry issues.

"There's been considerable outreach," he said.

Bloom acknowledged there is no formal comment period, but said people can still write to the forestry division about the plan.

"We take comments anytime, any day, on anything we do," said John Seifert, state forester.

Directions on how to communicate with the division are at its website, www.in.gov/dnr/forestry, as is a copy of the proposed strategic plan. Look under "Publications and Presentations."

Reach reporter James Bruggers at (502) 582-4645 or at jbruggers@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1F9B2pR