Syracuse, N.Y. - Joe "Nasty" Grosvent, a radio talk show host on K-Rock in Syracuse, has not had health insurance since he finished college five years ago.

The 27-year-old said he does not need it because he's healthy and rarely goes to doctors. Grosvent said health insurance is unaffordable. He works part-time on "The Show," K-Rock's irreverent, early morning talk show, and at a guitar shop. He also moonlights as a musician and as a DJ at private parties. Grosvent and his wife Amber, who is also uninsured, live "paycheck to paycheck," he said.

"So far I haven't needed any medical care that costs more than what I would have to pay for insurance," he said.

Experts say the success of New York's new health insurance exchange that opens today rests largely on its ability to enroll young adults like Grosvent, referred to in insurance circles as "Young Invincibles." That's because younger, healthier people are needed to offset the higher health care costs run up by older, sicker people who buy coverage through the exchange. A disproportionate share of older, sicker people could drive up health insurance premiums.



Under the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, nearly all Americans must have health insurance next year or face a financial penalty of $95 or 1 percent of their household income. The IRS will collect the penalty by making an adjustment on individuals' 2014 tax returns due in April, 2015. The federal government will use the penalty money to subsidize premiums for many people who purchase insurance through the exchange.

The exchange is a marketplace where uninsured individuals like Grosvent can buy health insurance online, over the phone or in person.

Grosvent has not figured out yet whether to buy insurance or just pay the penalty.

The state exchange, known as NY State of Health, and insurers will put on a full court press to win over people like him. Young adults will be one of the primary targets of a $40 million advertising campaign the exchange launches today. They will hear messages like, "A broken bone doesn't have to break the bank," said Danielle Holihan, the exchange's deputy director.

Census figures show about 7.5 percent of Central New Yorkers are uninsured. That number is 18 percent among 18- to 34-year-old Central New Yorkers. Nationwide, that age group has the highest percentage of people who are uninsured. That's because many young adults just getting established are relatively low paid and work for employers who either do not offer health benefits or offer health benefits that are unaffordable.

George Chapman, a Syracuse health care consultant, expects many young adults to forgo insurance because paying the penalty may prove to be a cheaper option. "The economy is not doing well and many of these kids are unemployed or working in a low-paying job until the right one comes along and they can't afford it," he said.

A study released in August by the National Center for Public Policy Research, a conservative think tank, estimated 3.7 million single 18- to 34-year-olds without children will save at least $500 by declining insurance and paying the fine in 2014. It predicted another three million people in that age group could save at least $1,000 by refusing to buy insurance.

But other studies suggest young adults will buy health insurance if the price is right.



A recent survey by the Commonwealth Fund, a private health research foundation, shows most young adults want insurance if it's affordable. The survey found that when 19- to 29-year-olds are offered health insurance at work, most accept it. Twenty-two percent turned down the coverage because it was not affordable, while 5 percent declined because they said they didn't need it.

Sara Collins, a Commonwealth vice president, said the exchanges are addressing the affordability issue by offering federal tax credits to reduce individuals' premium costs. In addition, states like New York are expanding their Medicaid programs. Single adults with annual incomes up to about $15,856 will qualify for Medicaid on Jan. 1. The income limit is currently about $11,000. Medicaid does not charge premiums.

Dan Goetzmann, a Syracuse insurance broker, expects low prices available on the exchange to lure many young adults.

Health Republic, a new health plan started by the Freelancers Union, for example is offering an individual "bronze" plan, the least expensive of the four main plans on the exchange, for $226.61 a month in the Syracuse area. An individual making $20,000 a year is eligible for a monthly federal tax credit of $200.53. After the credit is applied, the monthly bill for that plan is $26.08.

Use the exchange's calculator to estimate your premium and tax credit



"The exchange has met the goal of offering an affordable plan," Goetzmann said.

But he said people who enroll in the lowest priced plans may be shocked when they find out how much they must spend out of their own pockets before insurance coverage kicks in. The Health Republic "bronze" plan, for example, has a $3,000 annual deductible for an individual. That means the policyholder would have to spend $3,000 before insurance coverage kicks in.

After meeting the deductible, the policyholder also would have to pay out of pocket for a portion of the medical services they receive in the form of co-payments and co-insurance. These out-of-pocket costs on the bronze plan could go as high as $6,350 annually. Some preventive care visits to the doctor for things like annual physicals and flu shots would be covered in full and not subject to the annual deductible.

Goetzmann said people who buy lower priced plans may also discover they have to use a limited network of doctors, hospitals and other providers.

Chapman, the health consultant, said people should not buy health plans based on price alone. He said consumers should make sure their doctors and hospitals participate in the plans.

The exchange also is offering catastrophic health plans to people under age 30. These plans have an annual deductible of $6,350, which means coverage does not begin until the individual pays that much out of pocket. These plans cover three annual primary care visits that are not subject to the deductible. Catastrophic plans in the Syracuse area start at $158.15 a month. But people who buy them are not eligible for federal tax credits.

Obamacare began addressing the health insurance problems of young adults in 2010 when it allowed adult children to remain on their parents' health insurance up to age 26.



New York law gives employers the option of permitting young adults to remain on their parents' policies until age 29.

Briana Viel of Cicero stayed on her parents' plan until her 26th birthday last year.



Viel, who has type 1 diabetes, has been uninsured since then. Viel, who works as a graphic designer, said the health insurance available from her employer is unaffordable. She goes to the Poverello Health Center, a clinic on Syracuse's North Side, to get free insulin. Before discovering the clinic, Viel said she was spending more than $250 for a two-month insulin supply.

"I would love to have health insurance," she said.

She hopes to find something affordable on the health insurance exchange.

Grosvent, the K-Rock radio personality, said being uninsured means he's "always playing with fire."

"Heaven forbid if I had to take an ambulance ride, that could put you in extreme debt," he said.

But so far the odds have been in his favor.

"I am a little accident prone and suffer bumps and bruises," Grosvent said. "But I've discovered Neosporin and bandages. You patch things up and get on to the next day."

You can contact health writer James T. Mulder at jmulder@syracuse.com or (315) 470-2245. Follow him on Twitter @JamesTMulder