Carole Morrison never expected to lose her office job at Wal-Mart in 2010. She never expected her husband to die that same year. Then she exhausted her savings. And, finally, she got sick. Very sick.

“The day I went to Parkland, I was so embarrassed I started crying,” said Morrison, now 63. “I was laying on their counter and I could not breathe.”

From that low point five years ago, the Garland woman is back on her feet. Her condition, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was stabilized by Parkland Memorial Hospital staff, which also encouraged her to buy a health insurance policy through the Affordable Care Act. This year’s sign-up ends Sunday.

“I’ve got the insurance card in my wallet,” Morrison said with pride.

She joined the newest group of insured residents of Dallas County: those who qualify to buy private health insurance but who want to stay in the public health system. The attraction is Parkland’s promise to forgive most of the co-payments and deductibles for patients earning less than 200 percent of the federal poverty level.

It works like this: Instead of trying to collect high-deductible payments from its lowest-income patients, the hospital would collect only what the patients’ insurance plans would cover. Without their deductible forgiven, these patients probably wouldn’t buy the insurance.

Dr. Fred Cerise, Parkland’s president and CEO, said it made sense to apply the hospital’s charity-care program to insured patients, who could afford the subsidized monthly premium but not the hefty co-payments and deductibles that go with it.

“It’s not an insurance program,” he stressed. “It’s financial assistance for people in certain income categories who buy private insurance.”

Hospitals scramble

The state’s decision not to expand Medicaid coverage has left millions of Texans uninsured, causing the public hospitals that serve them to scramble for funding. The new federal law is lowering the supplemental Medicaid payments they previously received each year.

“We’ve got to find creative ways that will bring in more revenues, and the state and federal government have got to help,” said Ted Shaw, president and CEO of the Texas Hospital Association. He cited a managed-care program set up for uninsured patients in San Antonio as another example of how to control hospital costs.

Last year, Parkland helped almost 1,500 patients move from its charity-care program into private insurance coverage. The hospital subsequently was reimbursed about $20 million from private insurance plans purchased under the Affordable Care Act.

“But those two numbers are not connected,” said Catherine Bradley, a Parkland spokeswoman. “We have no way of knowing how many of the people we saw with ACA plans were previously uninsured.”

The hospital’s board of managers approved the financial assistance program in December. It goes into effect in March.

Snagging more revenues is important for Dallas County’s lone public hospital, which approved a $1.4 billion budget for this year with a $34 million deficit. County taxpayers are contributing nearly $450 million, an amount hospital administrators would like to reduce.

But nobody knows whether thousands of Parkland’s low-income patients will sign up this year or be scared away by the high deductibles.

“You can get people to sign up for an insurance plan, but that doesn’t mean they have a lot of discretionary income,” said Bob Reed, Parkland’s vice president for patient access.

For example, it costs Morrison $27.44 for her subsidized insurance premium, instead of the typical $544 monthly charge for Molina Healthcare’s silver plan, which she chose. But the plan also came with a $4,000 deductible — the amount Morrison must pay out of pocket before her insurer pays any medical expenses.

“It might as well have been a million,” Morrison said with a laugh. She gets only $1,229 a month in disability payments.

Charges slashed

Under the Parkland Financial Assistance Program, Morrison’s $14,748 annual income falls far below 200 percent of the poverty level, which is $23,540. Instead of being responsible for the $4,000 deductible, she can expect to pay $10 per doctor visit, $3 to $8 for each prescription and up to $100 for an emergency room visit.

If she chooses to leave Parkland, however, she’s likely to pay the full deductible at another hospital or health care provider before her insurance kicks in.

“I could elect to go to other doctors, but Parkland has been so good to me,” Morrison said. “Sometimes it’s a pain in the neck with all those people there, but my care has been excellent. My pulmonary doctor is just wonderful.”

How much the Financial Assistance Program will benefit Parkland’s bottom line is not yet clear. Hospital officials estimate that nearly 30,000 of its patients should have bought insurance coverage when the new federal law went into effect last year. Most didn’t.

So far this year, about 900 Parkland patients have been guided through the insurance enrollment process, using the hospital’s computers and staff assistance. It isn’t known how many completed their enrollment and are paying their monthly premiums.

“They say they have signed up, but until they bring us the insurance card, we don’t know,” Reed said.