Beasley blew his own mind Thursday night. (USATSI)

According to multiple reports, via SI.com, Heat forward Michael Beasley, in his first game back with Miami after signing as a free agent this summer, had an incident in his first game. Despite scoring nine points and adding two rebounds, Beasley reportedly required "medical treatment" after punching himself in the head out of frustration.

No, really.

Beasley called for traveling and begins punching himself in the head. Meanwhile, James Jones pushes him into defensive position. — Joseph Goodman (@JoeGoodmanJr) October 11, 2013

Treatment as in the application of those steel compresses cut doctors use on boxers. Beas' brow was swollen RT @jordub as in stitches? — Joseph Goodman (@JoeGoodmanJr) October 11, 2013

Of course, Beasley also did something a little odd after one offensive play. Upset with himself over missing a shot, Beasley started punching himself in the head while running back on defense. He punched himself so hard that he needed treatment after the game from the Heat's trainer. Steel compresses (like the ones cut doctors use in boxing) were applied to Beasley's brow in the locker room.

via Heat Check.

He said he was disappointed about getting a quick foul upon entering, missing a defensive rotation and failing to come up with a blocked shot on Pistons guard Will Bynum, slapping himself in the head so hard at one point that he required postgame treatment from trainer Jay Sabol. "Overall," he said, "I give myself a B-minus, C-plus. "I'm just trying to teach myself to do everything hard."

via Miami Heat take on Detroit Pistons in NBA exhibition at Palace of Auburn Hills - Sun Sentinel.

It's a shame that this is going to overshadow a good start for him, even in preseason, to an attempt at a career resurrection. Beasley was drafted by Miami in 2008, before being traded in 2010 after the formation of the Lebron-James-Chris-Bosh-Dwyane-Wade Triad. He had no success in Minnesota, then signed a three-year, $18 million deal with Phoenix which the Suns bit the bullet on and waived him of this summer.

But it is pretty funny that he hit himself in the head so hard he needed basically an ice pack on his head.

I don't know, people are always demanding that Beasley have some level of self-discipline...