The United States Internal Revenue Service announced Thursday it had decided to scrap a set of proposed regulations widely interpreted as the linchpin of an effort by the Obama administration to shut down tea party groups and other conservative grassroots organizations. According to senior IRS officials, the agency received more comments from the public on these regulations after they were first promulgated than on any in its history. Most of those comments, one presumes, were not complimentary, seeing as how the proposed rules amounted to nothing less than an indirect attack on the rights to freedom of speech and assembly guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution.

This comes close on the heels of the still-unfolding scandal in which agency personnel – some at senior levels – used their offices and the resources available to them to target conservative groups in ways designed to keep them from acting in opposition to the current administration. More would be known if the former head of the tax-exempt organizations section of the IRS, Lois Lerner, were willing to be candid with congressional investigators, but, as everyone knows, she’s “taken the fifth” and isn’t telling what she knows.

[See a collection of editorial cartoons on the IRS Scandal]

Anyone who has pinned their hopes on Lerner giving up the keys to the kingdom is probably in for a disappointment. The smart money says she doesn’t talk until a blanket presidential pardon comes through, probably in the closing days of the Obama presidency, that looks like it only applies to the congressional contempt charges pending against her but actually goes much farther. Then she’ll write her book, make a couple of million dollars to pay off her legal bills, go on "Dancing With the Stars," finish third, and wind up anchoring some weekend show about women in government and politics on MSNBC.

The scrapping of the proposed rules received a favorable response on Capitol Hill. Michigan Republican Rep. Dave Camp, chairman of the House Ways & Means Committee, called the now-abandoned package of regulations something that “was wrong from the start.” During his committee’s investigations into the IRS’s abuse of its powers, Camp said, “We exposed the true intent of this rule – to silence the voice of conservative non-profit groups. We also uncovered the fact that this rule was purposefully kept out of the public’s view and developed offline."

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

“The American people spoke out loud and clear against it, and hopefully the IRS and the Obama administration will think twice before ever trying to go down this path again,” Camp added, possibly forgetting that the IRS said the proposed rules were being withdrawn for retooling and would be reissued some time in the future, after starting the whole process of developing them over again from scratch. And there, as Shakespeare might have observed, lies the rub. The free-speech stifling mandates are not gone; they are just being held in abeyance until such time as they are needed once again.

The liberal left understands in a way few conservatives do that to control the flow of money in the political process is to control the political process itself. This was the intent of the McCain-Feingold campaign finance law, of the Disclose Act, of the opposition to Citizens’ United, and the effort to rewrite the rules of what are officially called “social welfare organizations,” but would be more accurately labeled as public advocacy groups.