Under President Nixon, a Republican, some very critical things concerning our planet were initiated — the Environmental Protection Agency, the Clean Water Act, the Endangered Species Act and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The catalytic converter was introduced, and auto emissions standards were set. All this was done with bipartisan support.

Today, we have hundreds of climate scientists studying global warming, and they overwhelmingly agree global warming is real, that man is the primary reason for it and burning fossil fuels is the outstanding source. We now have a satellite above the Earth with cameras and telescopes orbiting our planet 13 times a day, streaming data about our atmosphere to scientists. The satellite was proposed by Al Gore while he was vice president, and it was called Goresat by Republicans who opposed it.

Changes predicted by scientists are occurring faster than expected, and are more severe. The rise in water levels will create a refugee problem. The military advises it will cause huge security problems. Our time to address pollution is getting shorter.

The largest single source of pollution is coal-fired power plants. To address this problem, Obama proposed a clean power plan that asked states to present their own plan to reduce emissions from those power plants.

U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell, a Republican, advised states to refuse. If they do, this will go to the courts and drag on for ages. This is what McConnell wants. He is interested only in corporations, not miners. The corporations have been abusing the environment and miners for years. McConnell’s concern for the coal industry comes ahead of the future of our planet.

Republicans also oppose restrictions on mountaintop removal mining and protection of impacted streams impacted. Basically, if it is for the environment and disturbs the status quo, the GOP is against it.

Science’s sole purpose is to determine the facts. The Republican Party was not always anti-science, while ignoring facts. It is critical that we have leaders who make decisions based on scientific facts and factual evidence, not ideology. The words Republican, Democrat or independent mean nothing — what they believe in and act on means everything.

Leon Logan

Tucumcari, N.M.