Preliminary observations in qualitative research into low income earners' experience of Canberra's housing affordability crisis confirm the lack of such options for families. Photo: Supplied

Talking about poverty and hardship in our community borders on taboo. We like to soften the discussion with phrases like "social exclusion". Partly this is because it challenges our self-identity as Canberrans. We like to think we live in a comfortable and civilised city. The truth for many of our neighbours is very far from this ideal.

This week is Anti-Poverty Week. The purpose is not merely to raise awareness about the reality of poverty in our community but to spark action to address its causes. In Canberra one of the primary drivers of hardship is the lack of affordable housing.

Like the proverbial frog in the pot, we don't always see how bad our own social problems have become when we live with them every day. Last month a Perth-based charity CEO made the observation that after more than two decades regularly visiting the national capital, he was shocked to see such a significant number of visible homeless on the streets of our CBD this year.

Over the past five years, Anglicare's annual rental affordability snapshot has consistently shown Canberra to be one of the least affordable rental markets for people on low incomes. Indeed, this year, the only affordable option for a person on Newstart was renting someone's lounge room. Likewise there were no affordable and appropriate properties in Canberra-Queanbeyan for a single parent with two children on the parenting payment including the Family Tax Benefit.

Advertisement

Anglicare has commenced qualitative research to better understand low income earners' experience of Canberra's housing affordability crisis, particularly focusing on West Belconnen in partnership with agencies such as UnitingCare Kippax. Preliminary observations confirm the lack of affordable housing options for families. Coupled with the absence of effective early intervention strategies, this means that low income earners experiencing rental stress in the private market spiral through less and less appropriate housing until they reach a "homelessness" crisis. One young parent with children observed that it was only when they ended up in a refuge that their housing needs were prioritised: "The only time they take things seriously and really push it forward is if you have people like Care and Protection involved and they want to get kids out of the refuge and into an actual home. That's the only time they go 'oh this other government agency is telling us to do things, maybe we should do it'."

In the short term the affordable housing problem in Canberra is likely to get worse. As soon as the ACT Government thinks it has the problem beat, there is an influx of need from across the border. The decision of the NSW government to consolidate homelessness services in the wider region contributes to increased demand for community housing in Canberra.

While, we strongly support the decision of the ACT government to welcome Syrian refugees to our city, it is important this decision includes investment in properly supported accommodation options. A sustainable model for housing of asylum seekers and refugees in Canberra remains a significant missing piece in the puzzle.

Finally, how the ACT government manages the planned renewal of ageing public housing stock will be critical in ensuring there is not a decline or gap in supply in the short-term. It is also critical that these plans ultimately increase the supply of community housing options.

Tackling housing affordability is not a simple problem. It will take the best efforts of government, the private sector and the community. But acknowledging the complexity of the challenge is not the same as suggesting there are no solutions. Later this week, under the banner of Anti-Poverty Week, a Green Paper called "Safe+ Well: redefining the housing affordability crisis" will be released. It includes six contributions from community and private sector organisations outlining a range of ideas that the ACT government could use to improve the situation.

The plight of the most vulnerable in our community matters to all of us. It matters if we are to truly embody Australian values such as the "fair go". Providing everyone adequate housing builds a stronger city, where all citizens can take the first step towards a decent life. Even pragmatically, this kind of social investment will produce a more livable city which benefits all of us.

Jeremy Halcrow and Meg Richens are Co-Chairs of Anti-Poverty Week ACT. Jeremy is CEO of Anglicare (NSW South, West & ACT) and Meg is Executive Director of UnitingCare Kippax.