Loveland Elks Lodge hosts annual Children's Christmas Party Saturday for area children

Six-year-old Zowie Brown and her mom Michelle Brown share a laugh while enjoying a snack together during the Children's Christmas Party on Saturday at the Loveland Elks Lodge. ( Steve Stoner )

Five-year-old Giovanni Dabbiero asked Santa Claus Saturday for a real penguin, beaming as he sat on the bearded man's lap.

"That's my favorite animal. They swim and eat fish," the Berthoud boy said.

Giovanni's wish stood out among the many requests for Xboxes, PlayStations, bicycles, dolls and teddy bears handled by Santa and Mrs. Claus, subbed in by Rod Johnson, a member of the Loveland Elks Lodge No. 1051, and Peggy Hart, a volunteer with the Elks.

Santa and Mrs. Claus sat on the stage of the Lodge Room, listening to gift requests and passing out stockings filled with toys during the Loveland Elk Lodge's annual Children's Christmas Party. The party has been around for about 40 years.

"A lot of gifts have been pretty reasonable," said Johnson, who, along with Hart, had their photos taken with approximately 250 children. "Even at one, two years old, they can tell you what they want."

Jada Bernhardt, 9, said she wanted a teddy bear.

"I want to sleep with it," the Johnstown girl said. "They're fluffy."

Loveland girl Margaret Oscar, 8, wanted clothes to dress her stuffed hippo named Lola.

"She's my stuffed animal, and she's this tall," Margaret said, holding her hands apart eight inches.

Her brother, Gabe Oscar, 6, wanted a laptop, a flash drive and a video game.

"One more thing, I want a Hello Kitty T-shirt," Margaret said.

Eleven-year-old Kaitlyn Keisling wished for "a huge stuffed animal," she said.

Advertisement

"It's all squishy, soft and warm," the Loveland girl said. "I'm obsessed with stuffed animals."

The Clauses received mostly smiles from the children, but two infant girls cried, and a toddler boy refused to come on stage.

"It's all about the kids, making them happy and seeing smiles on their faces," Hart said. "This is a way to give back to the kids and to the community."

The three-hour event, open to all children in the community, offered face painting, hotdogs and cookies, and photos with sports team mascots and figures from Star Wars presented by the 501st Legion. Each child also received a hand-knit hat made by the women of the Elks Lodge.

Elks members hold several fundraisers starting in June, such as dinners, raffles and bingo games, to pay for the event, which costs about $4,000 each year.

In preparation for the event, the members stuffed 260 to 270 stockings with coloring and reading books, crayons, pencils and a stuffed animal. Fifty volunteers, half of them Elks members, worked the day of the event.

"Sometimes this is the only Christmas the kids have," said Christy Hornby, Elks chaplain and an elf for the day. "If we could help out those families who really could use it, then our job is done."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.