Gov. Nikki Haley, R- S.C., delivers a speech on "Lessons from the New South" during a luncheon at the National Press Club, on Sept. 2, 2015, in Washington. (Photo: Evan Vucci, AP)

WASHINGTON – South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley said Wednesday she would consider joining the Republican ticket next year if the party’s nominee asks her to run for vice president.

Haley, in a high-profile appearance at the National Press Club in Washington, initially said she would not spend time or energy thinking about the 2016 GOP ticket. But when asked about her interest in becoming a running mate, she didn’t dismiss the idea.

“If there is a time where a presidential nominee wants to sit down and talk, of course I will sit down and talk,” she said in response to audience questions after delivering a speech promoting South Carolina. She touted the state's success in recruiting industry, expanding workforce training and avoiding violence in the aftermath of two racially charged shootings this year. .

“Black lives do matter, and they have been disgracefully jeopardized by the movement that has laid waste to Ferguson (Mo.)and Baltimore (Md.),” Haley said. “In South Carolina, we did things differently.”

Haley’s handling of the June mass shooting at Emmanuel African Methodist Church in Charleston, in which white gunman Dylan Roof is charged with targeting nine black parishioners, launched her into the national spotlight. Within days she called for the removal of the Confederate flag from the Capitol grounds in Columbia, and she became the face of a state recovering from its segregationist past.

That helped fuel talk that Haley, 43, might be selected to run with whichever GOP candidate wins the party’s presidential nomination. The child of Indian immigrants, Haley is South Carolina’s first female, minority governor, an attractive biography to Republicans struggling to earn minority votes.

In her speech Wednesday, Haley addressed her party’s shortcomings with voters of color.

“As a conservative Republican myself, I have no doubts that when it comes to jobs, education, health care, and many other policy areas, Republican principles are the right ones for lifting up all people,” she said. “The problem for our party is that our approach often appears cold and unwelcoming to minorities. That is shameful, and it has to change.”

After complimenting GOP frontrunner Donald Trump as a smart businessman, she advised him not to “get mad” at his critics.

“Every time someone criticizes him, he goes and makes a political attack back,” Haley said. “That is not who we are as Republicans. That’s not what we do. That not what I want my South Carolinians to do.”

She also urged Republican candidates to celebrate the contributions of legal immigrants, and to offer more details about their plans to secure the Southwest border to reduce illegal immigration.

South Carolina Democratic Party Chairman Jaime Harrison said Haley’s calls for improving opportunities for minorities in the state ring hollow while she refuses to expand Medicaid to more lower-income residents, as allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

“While Governor Haley chases the national spotlight, South Carolina’s families continue to struggle to get ahead,” Harrison said in a prepared statement.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1UssaNu