In the course of the last couple of years, we have seen some of the most challenging events in our nation’s history. We have seen “occupy groups” who have staged protests for no greater purpose than to disrupt the businesses of others. They have occupied shopping malls as well as blocking traffic for commuters trying to get home from work. We have seen strife between police and protesters. We have seen unvetted illegals coming into our country from all over the world.

On the national political scene we have seen nearly two dozen individuals offer themselves to be the presidential candidate of one of the two major political parties. On the Democrat side, the party is now close to settling on someone who, if she had a different name, would be federally indicted for her mishandling of critical state secrets or for illegal fundraising activities. Her main rival for the party nomination was a senator who had always run as a Socialist rather than a Democrat.

On the Republican side, 17 governors, former governors, senators, and people from the ranks of medicine and business have sought the nomination. Many had distinguished records of service; making them well qualified to serve as president. This was a record-breaking number of qualified wannabes. After many debates, those that were more temperate dropped from the race. Thus leaving the playing field to the one individual who has been the most outspoken about the current state of affairs.

The question must be asked, what has occurred that has brought us to this point of rejecting proven leaders and brought about demonstrators from the left and the right?

My belief is that this is the legacy of President Obama. Those that voted to elect him eight years ago believed they were doing the right thing. Some wanted to be part of making history. Many were tired of war, convinced that President Bush had lied and gotten America into an unjustified war. After eight years, many were ready for a change. Then candidate Obama spoke of “Hope and Change,” never pressed by a doting media to explain what that meant. Speaking in generalities, he was able to defeat Hillary Clinton in the Democrat primaries and then win in November.

With limited experience and few capable high-level managers and only a collection of ideological soul mates, he overpromised. He had never been a leader in Illinois nor Washington. He had no experience in the business world. He knew nothing about how to make a small business run. He had never had to balance a budget or make a payroll. Yet suddenly, he was in the leadership role of the most powerful country in the world.

Eight years later, after numerous job killing new regulations and his hallmark “Obamacare,” many are struggling to move forward in life. The dreams of success are stifled for everyone except for those well connected to him. The unemployment rate “officially” does not seem a problem, however, everyone knows that the numbers are worthless because many have given up looking, while others are working part time jobs. Racial tension is greater now than at any time in the last generation. A major reason is that unemployment for young males is so very high. The “Hope and Change” turned out to be meaningless. What remains is an American people that are frustrated and are willing to take whatever action needed to take back our nation.