Something we’ve been working on lately in our home is teaching our boys respect.

While it’s clear we all love each other dearly, sometimes the way we talk or treat each other might prove otherwise. Respect in both word and deed is a necessary skill I know will serve my boys well in their lives. And lately, with the excitement in politics and lively disagreements between parties and people, it’s clear to me how far we’ve fallen as a society in disregarding this crucial behavior.

Having been in the public eye, I understand that negativity is “part of the gig.” There will always be harsh voices, and most of the time, those voices are loud.

I know there are some who would argue that it’s their “right” to post whatever they’re feeling online. But somewhere along the way, freedom of speech got twisted into “freedom to hate,” and I believe social media is largely to blame.

Hidden behind computer screens or smartphones, with fake names and an agenda, people have given themselves the green light to be as nasty and cruel as they want. I have been genuinely appalled at comments I’ve read targeted toward me and my family.

Is there a way to disagree respectfully? Absolutely. Take a page out of the book of my father-in-law, Gov. Gary Herbert, for example.

Tradition holds that the chairman of the National Governors Association give a toast to the president of the United States at the association's meeting. It should come as no surprise that the governor and President Barack Obama can be described as political polar opposites, and therefore tend to disagree on pretty much every major issue. So you can imagine how difficult it must have been for Herbert to raise a glass to the man who gave us the Affordable Care Act.

Nevertheless, my father-in-law was able to give an honorable toast to the nation's commander in chief at the meeting held in Washington in February. He was dignified, diplomatic and, above all, respectful. Herbert spoke of the toll it can take on a person and his family to hold public office, particularly the president of the United States, and thanked the Obamas for their service. So while there is much disagreement, there is mutual respect.

We are in the thick of election season. With county and state conventions, as well as presidential primaries, our neighborhood has been abuzz with talk of politics. At the state convention recently, I read some statistics that said 93 percent of Republican delegates are members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

As an LDS Church member myself, I know that we believe in treating others as children of God, with love and respect. But I was genuinely appalled at the lack of respect and decency with which my family and I were treated, both face to face and through online comments. I get that we are not going to agree 100 percent on every issue all the time. But that shouldn’t be an excuse to promote violence, hate or cruelty simply because you want your opinion heard.

When I was in Nashville, I was surprised that simple phrases such as “yes, ma’am” and “no, ma’am” were commonplace. It is almost unheard of to hear a child say that here. Along with teaching our young ones the ABCs, perhaps we should spend equal time on the letters R-E-S-P-E-C-T.

Carmen Rasmusen Herbert is a former "American Idol" contestant who writes about entertainment and family for the Deseret News.