Just six days ahead of the Granite State's first-in-the-nation primary, the two remaining Democratic candidates addressed a town hall audience in Derry, New Hampshire about some of the looming concerns voters have about their respective candidacies.

Donald Trump, in a tit-for-tat with his chief rival coming out of Iowa, accused Texas Sen. Ted Cruz of bearing direct responsibility for the Affordable Care Act. "Ted Cruz gave us Obamacare," Trump said at a rally in Little Rock, Arkansas. Cruz, however, has suggested Trump backed the same law.

Amid mounting concerns over the rapid spread of the Zika virus, some major airlines are putting new measures in place to help their staff and clients feel safer. So far, the changes include more flexibility for both flight crews and passengers where travel to Latin America is involved.

War and poverty in Syria have led to the largest refugee crisis since World War II. More than a million were welcomed by Germany, but the welcome is wearing thin. We meet one mayor who warns the "numbers have to decline or else there will be breakdowns in German cities and communities."

Today will either be one of the best days of someone's life, or the one they regret for a very long time. Whoever bought the lucky ticket for the $63 million jackpot in California must come to a lottery office by the end of the day -- or that $63 million piece of paper will become trash.

While sports reporters were busy handicapping Sunday's big game between the Denver Broncos and Carolina Panthers, two CBS News correspondents were dispatched to each team's hometown with the mission to find out whether Denver or Charlotte is the real "super city."

More than 13 million prescriptions have been written for the blood-thinning medication rivaroxaban (Xarelto) since it was FDA approved in 2011. A clinical trial showed it had a lower risk of some serious complications compared to an older drug. But now a medical journal investigation is raising questions.

More top news:

U.S.

Severe weather, tornadoes slam the south

Black man shot, paralyzed by Fla. deputy awarded $21.3M

IRS computer glitch shuts down tax return e-file system

On this day in 1974, Patty Hearst was kidnapped

World

U.N. panel reportedly sides with Julian Assange

Grizzly end to search for student who vanished in Cairo

Kerry says Syria's actions show it's not serious about peace

Dramatic drone video reveals devastation of Syrian city

Politics

Clinton: Right-wing "conspiracy" better-funded than ever

Trump's plane forced to make emergency landing

Obama to propose billions to help young people with careers

Business

With their own loans, students are know-nothings

Why Super Bowls can be a super letdown economically

For Marissa Mayer, Yahoo's woes keep deepening

Science and tech

Cosmonauts stage smooth spacewalk

Robot designed to annoy telemarketers

Health

Fla. declares health emergency over Zika in 4 counties

Higher temps helping Zika virus spread

Entertainment

Witness: Prosecutor misled her about "Serial" case