Buy Photo Miranda Lambert accepts the award for Female Vocalist of the Year at the 2014 CMA Awards. (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean )Buy Photo

While I wasn’t certain who would win the Country Music Association’s Entertainer of the Year on Wednesday, I knew it would be a man. That’s because the country music industry doesn’t give its female artists the respect their music deserves based on its commercial success and critical acclaim.

Indeed, in the past 25 years — beginning with 1989, the year Taylor Swift was born — there have only been three female artists who have won CMA Entertainer of the Year — Swift, Dixie Chicks and Shania Twain.

Women in country music are making the best country music today, and that’s not just my opinion. According to the music industry voters of the CMA, Miranda Lambert made the best country album and country single and participated in the best vocal event of the year, while Kacey Musgraves co-wrote the best song.

Grammy voters decided that Musgraves also co-wrote the best country song and released the best country album of the last year. At the 2014 Academy of Country Music Awards, Lambert also released the best single record of the year and Musgraves made the best album of the year.

In the past, when I’ve lamented the perception and treatment of women in country, I’ve had male industry veterans tell me that if women will just sell albums, they can turn things around. I’ve got two words for them: Taylor Swift.

So where is the disconnect? Largely at country radio.

In the current Billboard Country Airplay chart, there are no solo women, and only two acts with females — Little Big Town and Maddie & Tae — in The Top 10. If you expand the list to the Top 20, you can add two more women — Carrie Underwood and RaeLynn. If you expand the list to the Top 30, you won’t find an additional female name.

Many radio programmers examine the music of female artists through a harsher lens than songs released by men. Some believe that women’s songs don’t work on country radio, while other programmers want to break women through radio, but they just haven’t had much success.

Record executives say they’ve been told there’s only one slot for a new female. If a female artist’s first single doesn’t perform well on radio, they have a much more difficult time than a male artist getting a second chance by programmers. Then it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy: Programmers don’t believe that women will break through because it hasn’t happened.

With few women played on country radio, fewer new careers are launched, as evidenced by the dearth of successful new females. Quick. Try to name five females who have released their first albums in the last five years. Not easy, is it? Yet numerous male names could easily roll off of the tongues of country fans. In the past three years, only three of the 15 artists nominated for the CMA’s best new artist award have been females.

Because of these programming choices, radio has become a testosterone-fueled sonic playground that is virtually unlistenable. It reinforces the pop culture trend that strips women of their dignity by defining them solely by their bodies and appeal to men. Is this the atmosphere in which we want to raise our children? Is this the legacy we want to leave for Nashville and country music?

I was a loyal WSIX fan until Gerry House left, but then I switched formats because I couldn’t take it anymore. I only returned when Blair Garner brought his great morning show to NASH-FM. But more often than not, I switch formats once his show is over, after I’ve heard all I can stand of the songs about drinking and objectifying women.

What can be done to hear more females and fewer songs that define women solely as physical specimens? First, quit listening to country radio and contact the stations to let them know why.

Second, use the power of the purse. Since the long-held marketing industry belief is that 80 percent of women control household spending, let the advertisers of these stations know that you have stopped listening to country radio and you won’t financially support any companies that back this philosophy. As radio executives say, they aren’t here to sell records; they are here to sell ads. As listeners, we can say, it’s hard to sell ads if no one is listening.

Nashville native Beverly Keel is a longtime journalist and professor; reach her at beverlyjkeel@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1u9IyZX