LANSING, MI — Michigan Republican Gov. Rick Snyder is a certified public accountant, and his re-election may very well hinge on whether voters trust his numbers over those of Democratic challenger Mark Schauer.

The former businessman has governed like one, balancing budgets early, saving for the future and referring to citizens as customers who deserve solid service from the state.

It’s an approach that has Michigan moving in the right direction, according to Snyder, who has the numbers to make his case.

The unemployment rate has fallen from 11 percent to 7.2 percent since Snyder took office, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the state has added more than 233,000 payroll jobs.

But Schauer argues that too many residents have been left behind as the national economy rebounds from the Great Recession, which hit Michigan particularly hard.

The former Congressman claims Snyder is missing a column in his spreadsheet — people — and points to a second set of numbers that are no less accurate.

Michigan’s unemployment rate was still tied for the fifth highest in the nation as of August. Payroll jobs started returning in 2010, and job growth slowed during Snyder’s second and third full years in office.

The polling numbers make this much clear: Michigan’s gubernatorial race is close — much closer than many pundits originally predicted it would be. Snyder leads Schauer by an average of 3.5 percentage points, according to Real Clear Politics.

It's a numbers game within the margin of error with just weeks to go.

RICK SNYDER: FROM NUMBERED STREETS TO ROMNEY BUILDING

Snyder, 56, grew up in a 900-square foot home on “the numbered streets” of Battle Creek, a modest start for a self-made millionaire who was able to jumpstart his 2010 campaign with an infusion of personal cash.

“I’m probably overly sensitive to it, because I never want it to be viewed as an insult about my folks to say I didn’t have much,” the former tech CEO and venture capitalist told MLive.

“I had a wonderful childhood, but I was never in Detroit, never made it to a Tigers ball game. I didn’t know what a bagel was until I went to college, because we just ate really simply.”

Snyder’s dad owned a small window cleaning business. His mom was a homemaker. They were surprised when Snyder asked if he could start taking community college classes when he was 14 years old. They let him enroll when he could drive.

The future governor cut short his senior year of high school to enroll at the University of Michigan, where he earned three degrees by the time he was 23. He taught classes, including a course on taxes, which have emerged as a key issue in his bid for re-election.

Snyder and Schauer have sparred over the economic implications of the tax code rewrite he approved in 2011. The plan was projected to cut business taxes by an estimated $1.7 billion a year while increasing individual tax collections by $1.4 billion.

“What we made was a fair system to encourage job creation,” Snyder said this month during his one and only debate with Schauer, focusing on elimination of the onerous Michigan Business Tax, which he had called the “dumbest” of its kind in the country.

While business groups praised the move, the other side of the equation has proven a political liability for Snyder. The Homestead Property Tax Credit was slashed, the Earned Income Tax Credit was reduced and a long-standing exemption on all pension income was phased out.

“It’s very seldom that Democrats get to make an issue out of tax hikes,” said Bill Ballenger, a former GOP lawmaker who founded the Inside Michigan Politics newsletter. “That just hardly ever happens. Schauer has got the opportunity to take advantage of it this year, and I think he has.”

MORE: See how Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder responded to MLive's Voter Guide questionnaire

Snyder has spent considerable time defending the so-called pension tax. The plan grandfathered in anyone over the age of 67, phased in the tax for individuals over 60 and now allows a senior couple to exempt the first $40,000 of income from any source, including a job.

“It's still one of the top ten most generous schemes in the country” for seniors, the governor has said at a series of campaign town hall events across the state.

Snyder’s tenure has defied easy categorization. He signed partisan bills making Michigan a right-to-work state, denying same-sex benefits to government employees and imposing new restrictions on abortion clinics.

But he’s also reached across the aisle to expand Medicaid eligibility under the Affordable Care Act and secure state financing to minimize pension cuts in Detroit’s bankruptcy case, frustrating some conservatives in the process.

"Stop and think, have you ever thought you'd see Detroit as well-poised for a bright future as you see today?" Snyder said in the debate.

MARK SCHAUER: STICKING BY EDUCTION NUMBERS

Schauer, 53, was born and raised in Howell. His dad worked as high school science teacher, and his mom was a registered nurse who took evening shifts when possible so that one parent could always be home.

“It was a wonderful upbringing in a small town that showed there’s value in doing work that benefits others, and that if you work hard and play by the rules, you can have incredible opportunities,” Schauer told MLive.

“That’s what was provided for me.”

He played baseball and football through his junior year in high school but said he also loved the classroom. He went on to earn three college degrees as well.

Schauer regularly references his parents on the campaign trail, and a former high school teacher has joined him at several events. He has vowed to be the "education governor" and to conduct a study to determine the true cost of a quality system.

“The fact of the matter is, schools have less money in the classroom, and our kids are suffering because of that,” said Schauer. “For me, public education will be my number one priority. It is the key to building a strong economy.”

Education funding numbers have dominated the governor’s race. Schauer has stood by his controversial claim that Snyder cut $1 billion from education, which the governor has called a lie. State records show that total K-12 appropriations are up about $1 billion since 2011.

Most of the new money has been targeted to help pay escalating retirement costs, and minimum per-pupil funding for classroom operations is down if you factor in inflation. There’s also less money available in the School Aid Fund for possible use because of other tax policy and budget decisions made on Snyder’s watch.

MORE: See how Democratic gubernatorial hopeful Mark Schauer responded to MLive's Voter Guide questionnaire

Schauer launched his political career in 1993, when he was appointed to the Battle Creek City Commission. He would go on to win election to various state and federal offices until losing a Congressional rematch with U.S. Rep. Tim Walberg in 2010.

While critics have called him a career politician, Schauer has championed his experience, arguing that his work in Lansing and Washington D.C. taught him things about the legislative process that would set him apart from Snyder, who won his first election four years ago.

“I will reach out to Republicans and Democrats, and it’s needed around fixing our roads. It’s needed around making schools our top priority. It’s needed around tax fairness,” Schauer said. “Ultimately, we have to pull together to create an economy that works for everyone, not just a few.”

THIRD PARTY CANDIDATES



• Mark Buzuma of Grand Haven, Libertarian Party



• Paul Homeniuk of East Lansing, Green Party



• Mark McFarlin of Bay City, US Taxpayers Party



Check out the • Mark Buzuma of Grand Haven, Libertarian Party• Paul Homeniuk of East Lansing, Green Party• Mark McFarlin of Bay City, US Taxpayers PartyCheck out the MLive Voter Guide for more information on each gubernatorial candidate.

Schauer’s lengthy voting record has given Republicans plenty of ammunition to use against him. At the federal level, he voted for the Affordable Care Act. It may have cost him his seat in Congress, but he says he’d do it again.

In Lansing, Schauer voted for a 2007 budget deadline deal that raised the personal income tax rate from 3.9 percent to 4.35 percent. The rate was scheduled to roll back by 2015, but Snyder froze it at 4.25 percent in 2011.

“It may have been more politically expedient (to vote no), but I felt it was important to move forward, to not have a protracted budget battle,” said Schauer, who was minority leader in the Republican-controlled Senate at the time.

“Remember that went down to the wire. There was even a very brief several-hour shutdown. That’s not good government. I was part of a solution.”

THE NUMBERS GAME

Polls suggest that jobs, education and the condition of Michigan roads are the most important issues to voters this fall, but there’s another number that could make or break the election: 990,000.

That’s how many Democrats didn’t vote in 2010, according to Party Chairman Lon Johnson, who has tapped new technology to reach voters and get them out to the polls.

Research Michigan candidates and issues

“Turnout is critical,” said TJ Bucholz, a Democratic political consultant for Vanguard Public Affairs, noting that Michigan is a blue state in presidential years when the top of the ticket is a heavy draw.

“If Lon Johnson and the Democratic Party can deliver on their promise that they’ll turn out a higher (proportion) of voters, it will be a real race in Michigan.”

Republicans have also used technology to crowd-source outreach this year, helping volunteers connect with potential GOP voters in their neighborhood. They've even opened a campaign office in the traditional Democratic stronghold of Detroit.

Schauer appears to be polling well with his own party after touring the state the past year and a half, and the same seems to be true for Snyder, who didn’t begin campaigning in earnest until September.

They’re now fighting over a smaller pool of likely voters — 10 to 15 percent, according to recent polls — who are undecided. History suggests the final decision may have more to do with Snyder than Schauer.

“A re-election effort is basically always a referendum on the incumbent governor,” said Ballenger. “The only other issue is, what is the alternative?”

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.