Associated Press Rakuten Eagle’s Masahiro Tanaka looks at the scoreboard after allowing the Giants’ Javier Lopez,center, hit a two-run homer during Game Six of the Japan Series on Nov. 2, 2013.

Update: Japan’s Cinderella baseball team lived happily ever after, after all. And star pitcher Masahiro Tanaka magically helped out, even after his record winning streak turned into a pumpkin.

The details: The Tohoku Rakuten Eagles Sunday night beat the Yomiuri Giants 3-0 in the deciding Game Seven of the Japan Series, giving the team from the region slammed by the 2011 quake-tsunami-nuclear disaster its first-ever championship.

The victory followed a heart-breaking loss for the Eagles Saturday against the 22-time champion Giants, who gave Rakuten ace Tanaka his first loss in more than a year, ending a record 30-game winning streak.

Tanaka added a touch of drama to Sunday’s win, coming in to pitch the ninth inning in relief, earning the save. Tanaka’s appearance was remarkable — and risky for his pitching arm — coming the day after he threw a full nine-inning complete game, tossing a career-high 160 pitches.

Sunday’s save allowed Tanaka to end on a high note his memorable season — and likely his career in Japan. He’s widely expected to follow fellow Japanese star pitchers like Yu Darvish of the Texas Rangers and Koji Uehara of the Boston Red Sox, and jump next season to Major League Baseball in the U.S.

*** *** *** ***

Original Item, posted under headline “Japanese Baseball Fairytale Popped”:

It seemed too good to be true. And, in the end, that was the case.

The longest winning streak for a pitcher in the history of baseball came abruptly to an end Saturday — delaying, and possibly denying, a storybook championship for Japan’s hardscrabble Tohoku region.

Rewind to Saturday evening, Japan time, at Kleenex Stadium in Sendai. (Yes, that’s right. Kleenex Stadium). Game Six of the Japan Series. The Rakuten Golden Eagles were leading the feared Yomiuri Giants — the New York Yankees of Japan — three games to two. A victory would give the team its first-ever championship, a heartwarming boost to the hard-hit northeast region still struggling from the 2011 triple-disaster earthquake-tsunami-nuclear meltdown.

Victory seemed assured. The mighty Masahiro Tanaka was on the mound — most likely his last start in Japan before an expected jump to the U.S. for next season. And Tanaka had been unbeatable, literally, all season. Tanaka had, in fact, set a world record for unbeatability. He was last tagged with a loss on August 19, 2012. Since then, he had racked up 30 straight victories in regular season and post-season games. The last professional pitcher to come anywhere close to that streak was New York Giants hurler Carl Hubbell, who notched 24 consecutive wins over the 1936 and 1937 seasons.

Saturday’s game began predictably, and auspiciously, for Tanaka, starting the day after his 25th birthday. The Eagles jumped ahead with two runs in the second inning, while Tanaka held the Giants scoreless. Things fell apart in the fifth. Tanaka gave up a two-base hit to the first batter. Then Jose Lopez, a journeyman infielder who had come to the Giants after bouncing around the majors for a decade, most recently with the Chicago White Sox, came to the plate. Lopez had been 0-15 in the Series, but smacked a 2-2 pitch over the left field wall to tie the game. The Giants scratched out another run against Tanaka in the same inning to take the lead, and padded it with one more in the sixth.

It was, according to Kyodo News, the first time Tanaka had given up more than three earned runs in 36 starts.

In the U.S., Tanaka would certainly have been pulled for a reliever at that point. But he refused to leave the mound. He ended up pitching a complete game, throwing a career-high 160 pitches in the 4-2 loss.

“I just didn’t play well — that’s number one,” Tanaka is quoted as saying in an article on Daily Sports Online. “I threw a lot of poor pitches. And they hit them.”

“Rakuten’s Tanaka — The Myth of Invincibility Finally Crumbles,” blared a headline on the website of NHK, Japan’s national broadcaster.

While Tanaka’s streak is done, Tohoku’s hopes are still alive. The deciding Game Seven is scheduled for Sunday in Kleenex Stadium. And despite his long outing Saturday, Tanaka — who came in late in earlier post-season games to pitch relief — said he’s ready for another inning or two, if it would help seal a late lead.

***

Correction: Masahiro Tanaka’s name was misspelled as Masahiru in an earlier version of this post.