A Michigan man says he almost died after eating a rare hamburger.

He thinks the meat in his burger was tainted with E. Coli and connected to a massive beef recall.



- Mobile users click here to watch video.

By profession, he’s a carpenter. But Kevin McDermed isn’t working much these days.

“I just needed a bottled-jack, and I need to be better. So, I don’t pass out while I’m doing all of this stuff,” said McDermed.

So what happened to send the 41-year-old tradesman to the hospital doubled over in pain? He ate a hamburger – rare.

“Yeah, almost died. I feel that way, yeah,” said McDermed.

The Michigan man believes he was one of 11 people in four states sickened by E. Coli tainted ground beef.

Wolverine Packing Company has recalled 1.8 million pounds of beef, in cooperation with the government.

Wolverine Packing says none of their meat has tested positive.

“I went to a restaurant. I ordered a burger. And four days later, I had to go to the hospital because I was violently ill,” said McDermed, “Extreme abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea. Lots of blood loss. Very uncomfortable.”

So far, government officials believe restaurants and retailers in nearly 40 states may be affected. It’s one of the biggest recalls of its kind in years.

One lawyer representing one of the presumed victims thinks it’s only going to get bigger.

“I expected the number of ill people to rise into the 20s or 30s as state and local governments count those people and report it to the CDC,” said food safety attorney Bill Marler, “I also expect that the amount in poundage of the meat will also go up well about 1.8 million; probably into the 2 million range over this week or early next week.”

USDA officials have publicly names retailers in nine states that may have sold the tainted meat. But they haven’t released the names of the restaurants affected – where 10 of the 11 victims ate before falling ill.

That doesn’t sit well with McDermed.

“I don’t know. Sounds a little shady to me,” said McDermed, “Because we should be informed. If there’s a deadly bacteria that can kill people, you should be told right away.”