“And that’s what we hope will happen again and we think it will”. “We’re going to stick to it”. And husband Bill Clinton will be campaigning Saturday in Chula Vista and Pomona on behalf of his wife, with a string of other stops planned by the former president through Monday.

“He says a lot of things that are provocative, that actually make the important task of building this coalition, bringing everybody to the table and defeating terrorism more hard”, she said.

If gun owners don’t vote for Trump, and Democrats take control of the White House in November, “We will witness the end of individual freedom in this country”, Cox said.

In all, Clinton has collected $213 million for the primary, more than any other candidate seeking the presidency, her campaign said Friday. “In my opinion, that’s what she’s going to go for”. She also leads him among female voters by 15 points, while Mr Trump defeats her by 11 points among men.

The first four speeches at the NRA’s annual meeting were full-throated attacks on Clinton, with speakers bringing up everything from her role in the aftermath of the terrorist attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, which left Ambassador Christopher Stevens dead, to the Affordable Care Act.

The #BernieBros are a social media plague, preying on Hillary Clinton’ s most earnest online fans.

“We should do whatever we can to get him nominated”, she said.

But if the facts wouldn’t stop Cox, they sure weren’t going to dissuade Lapierre, who once argued this: “If so-called gun-free zones supposedly save lives, why doesn’t Obama simply declare Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan to be one big, happy, gun-free zone?”

This was Donald Trump’s second time addressing the NRA but some in this crowd will admit, last year, his winning the Republican nomination was far from a sure bet.

For instance, the NRA didn’t endorse GOP nominee Mitt Romney until October, 2012.

Trump, who days earlier released a list of his potential Supreme Court nominees, called on Clinton to do the same, saying the Democrat’s list would be “night and day” from his.

He told voters it’s too late for establishment politics and that the US needs a government that represents more than just wealthy donors.

“The Second Amendment is something that’s in jeopardy in this election cycle”, Perry said.

Trump’s remarks came at the National Rifle Association convention in Louisville, Ky.

“Hillary said the Supreme Court is wrong on the Second Amendment”.

“Hillary Clinton, and I call her Crooked Hillary, she wants to abolish the Second Amendment”.

Trump also said that he would expand gun rights.

Clinton has made reducing gun violence a key plan of her campaign platform.

In a CNN interview, Clinton used the example of the apparent downing of an EgyptAir plane from Paris to Cairo to say that Trump would lack the skills to bring together US allies to respond to global threats. “And that choice is Donald Trump”.