According to new reports from the Middle East, ISIS is clamping down on what it calls “un-Islamic” Caesarean sections within the Caliphate, which they have deemed as “Western” and not healthy for women.

In order to impose its will, something that ISIS does with an iron fist, Syrian doctors have been ordered to charge 15,000 Syrian pounds for the procedure in order to encourage women to give birth naturally.

If the doctors fail to charge this sum, they will be subject to punishment at the hands of the relevant ISIS authority.

The ISIS written directive, which was published in the northern Syrian province of Deir az-Zor, announces, “In order to assist the believers from the sons of Islam who are working in the medical corps to support their brothers from the poor and others besides them from the Muslim populace, and with the desire to keep the course of medical work removed from arbitrary whim. This is to be considered as tantamount to a written order and all who contravene it will be held accountable in the Dar al-Qaḍa [IS judiciary] with attendant consequence.”

While ISIS works on new ways to oppress people and affect their daily lives, one so-called Muslim scholar even claimed that the rise in Caesarean operations in the Middle East is part of a plot against Muslim mothers.

Sheikh Muhammad ibn Saalih al Uthaymeen ruled that Muslim mothers shouldn’t need any pain relief when giving birth.

“I would like to take this opportunity to point out a phenomenon that has been mentioned to us, which is that many obstetricians, male and female, in the hospitals are too keen for birth to take place by surgical means, which is known as a Caesarean. I am afraid that this may be a plot against the Muslims, because the more births take place in this manner, the more the skin of the abdomen is weakened and pregnancy becomes more dangerous for the woman, and she becomes unable to get pregnant.”

While ISIS has tried to build a workable health service in Syria, its rules and regulations make it nearly impossible for trained medical professionals to work properly and deliver high-quality healthcare.

[Image credit: IBTimes.com]