Are you feeling the Bern for single-payer health insurance? Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, the independent senator from Vermont, unveiled his health insurance reform plan just before last Sunday’s Democratic debate.

“Bernie’s plan would create a federally administered single-payer health care program,” explains his official proposal. “As a patient, all you need to do is go to the doctor and show your insurance card. Bernie’s plan means no more copays, no more deductibles and no more fighting with insurance companies when they fail to pay for charges.” It’s called “Medicare for all.”

Sanders claims, “The typical-middle class family would save over $5,000 under this plan.” Which sounds a lot like President Obama’s 2008 campaign promise that Obamacare would save Americans $2,500 a year. In reality, premium costs have soared while coverage has dropped.

Californians long have seen similar state-level plans to Bernie’s – and have rejected them. In 1994, voters faced Proposition 186. In the official state ballot pamphlet, proponents promised to prescribe “the health insurance you need and deserve.” It attacked the insurance companies for wasting billions on “paperwork, advertising, profits, big buildings and big salaries.”

It insisted, in all capitals, “186 GUARANTEES YOUR CHOICE OF DOCTORS.”

Opponents charged Prop. 186 would not guarantee your choice of doctors and – another capital letters alert – “BILLIONS WILL BE SPENT EACH YEAR FOR STATE AND REGIONAL BUREAUCRACIES.” Voters rejected Prop. 186 by a huge margin, 73 percent to 27 percent.

The vote came shortly after even a Democratic Congress pulled the plug on Hillarycare, First Lady Hillary Clinton’s 1993 attempt to establish national coverage.

Since them, of course, Obamacare was passed in 2010 when Democrats briefly controlled both the House and a filibuster-proof 60-vote supermajority in the Senate. Obamacare was based on Romneycare in Massachusetts, and basically mandated that everybody must have health insurance.

In the current election, a more cautious Hillary explained, “I want us to defend and build on the Affordable Care Act and improve it.”

Back to California, current Los Angeles County Supervisor Sheila Kuehl introduced a single-payer bill when she was in the California Legislature from 1994 to 2008. It passed in 2006 and 2008, but was vetoed by Republican Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger.

“Socialized medicine is not the solution to our state’s health care problems,” Arnold explained in his 2006 veto message. “This bill would require an extraordinary redirection of public and private funding by creating a vast new bureaucracy to take over health insurance and medical care for Californians – a serious and expensive mistake. Such a program would cost the state billions and lead to significant new taxes on individuals and businesses, without solving the critical issue of affordability.”

Critics also said Kuehl’s plan eventually would lead to Canada-style total government control of the medical system to contain costs, a criticism also made of Bernie’s plan.

Strangely, just the next January, Schwarzenegger himself proposed a Romneycare/Obamacare-type medical insurance reform that was rejected by the Democratic Legislature as being too expensive.

Since Kuehl left the Legislature, a similar single-payer proposal was advanced by state Sen. Mark Leno, D-Sacramento. His Senate Bill 810 passed the state Senate in 2012, then died. Since then, reported the Los Angeles Review of Books, he “informed supporters of his intention not to refile.”

I think similar bills have not advanced because of the large state budget deficits following the Great Recession, the implementation of Obamacare and the likelihood Gov. Jerry Brown would oppose any expensive new program. As California’s experience shows, even a liberal Democratic state isn’t eager to inject itself with a single-payer system. Dr. Bernie will not be consulted.