Virginia’s influential hospital association has hired three former state legislators — one of them also a former member of Congress — as paid staff to reach out to elected officials and others to help community hospitals through perilous times.

The Virginia Hospital & Healthcare Association said Monday it had hired former Del. Dave Nutter, R-Christiansburg; former Sen. Mary Margaret Whipple, D-Arlington; and former U.S. Rep. Thelma Drake, a Republican and also previously a member of the House of Delegates and director of the Department of Rail and Public Transportation.

The three former legislators will begin work

Sept. 1 as regional directors for community and member outreach, one of the first visible initiatives of Sean Connaughton, a former secretary of transportation under Gov. Bob McDonnell who recently became the association’s president and chief executive officer.

Nutter served five terms in the Virginia House of Delegates before launching an unsuccessful campaign in 2011 to unseat state Sen. John Edwards, D-Roanoke. Nutter worked as an economic development specialist at Virginia Tech but has recently retired, the VHHA said.

In a statement Monday, Connaughton said Virginia’s hospitals face “unprecedented levels of change and uncertainty. These leaders will help the association and its members navigate these difficult waters.”

The VHHA would not say how much the new regional directors will be paid, citing their compensation as “confidential personnel information.”

The move comes after more than two years of pitched political battle in the General Assembly over expanding Virginia’s Medicaid program in some fashion to take advantage of billions of dollars in federal funds to provide health coverage to hundreds of thousands of uninsured Virginians.

The hospital association has played a lead role in advocating Marketplace Virginia, a commercial insurance alternative to straight Medicaid expansion that was adopted by the Senate and rejected by the Republican-dominated House.

The association, with about 100 members, has voiced concern with state policymakers about forgoing use of federal funds under the Affordable Care Act that would help offset deep cuts in federal reimbursements from Medicare, the federal health insurance program for the elderly.

The new regional directors have been tasked to reach out to member hospitals and other entities that support the association’s “mission and policy objectives”; provide “leadership and guidance” to the association; and “engage elected and appointed officials at the state, federal and local levels.”

Drake worked as a lobbyist for the association earlier this year through a subcontract with McGuireWoods Consulting, along with former Secretary of the Commonwealth Janet Polarek Kelly and former Deputy Secretary of Health and Human Resources Matt Cobb. Like Connaughton, they served under McDonnell, a staunch opponent of expanding Medicaid in Virginia.

The Roanoke Times

contributed to this report.