Cornerback Tramon Williams nearly picks off a pass which went incomplete to Panthers receiver Brenton Bersin in the first half of the Packers’ romp. Credit: Rick Wood

SHARE Videos Loading... Tramon Williams Loading... Packers Chat Oct. 19

PACKERS POSTGAME

Tyler Dunne, beat writer

Read Transcript

By of the

Green Bay — It was a closer call than most people thought. But earlier in the week, 31-year-old veteran Packers cornerback Tramon Williams was nearly convinced he was not going to be able to play against Carolina.

For just the second time in 117 games.

"He wouldn't let on to any of us how bad he was hurting," said linebacker A.J. Hawk.

After injuring his ankle a week ago in Miami, Williams missed all of the Wednesday and Thursday practices. By Friday, he could jog, but it wasn't much. On Saturday for the lighter team practice, his ankle felt OK, but he didn't know how it was going to hold up.

And that was his biggest concern — giving his word that he could play, and then backing out if the ankle turned for the worse. It was almost a game-time decision.

"It's hard to keep me out, obviously," said Williams. "I only missed one game in my career and part of the motivation was, the one game I missed — was against these guys. So I wanted to come back out and face that.

"But I wasn't going to jeopardize my health if I couldn't go."

Williams said he was given full trust in his own best judgment from coach Mike McCarthy. And he decided he could play.

Williams helped contain one of Carolina's best offensive threats, Kelvin Benjamin, to just three receptions for 61 yards and also had three tackles and a pass defensed in a dominating 38-17 performance by the Packers. With a defensive focus on the zone read, because the Packers knew Panthers quarterback Cam Newton was coming in a little bit healthier than previous weeks, Green Bay was ready for this option.

The defense was in control and Williams learned right away his ankle was good to go. Carolina threw his way a couple of times early and he was able to run. When Green Bay's offense exploded to an early 21-0 lead, the pressure was off.

"That was a good test for me, to see if I could come out of my breaks pretty good," said Williams. "There was one early where Benjamin crossed my face and I was able to come out of my break and be right there with him, as far as moving laterally. I felt good."

Williams nearly picked off Newton on third down late in the first quarter. His teammate, Clay Matthews, did get the interception on the play, but it didn't count because of a defensive pass interference call on Williams.

"It was a good play by everyone. I read the route, I read the quarterback, the way he wanted to go with it, and made a good break," said Williams. "For it to be taken back, just like that, it's tough. But, you know, the ref called what he thought he saw. You've got to respect that."

Shifting his balance from one foot to another while answering questions, Williams said he was a little sore after the game. But he said adrenaline helped him get through the day without too much pain.

In the end, he was confident in his decision. It wasn't at all like the 2011 season, when he played every game — but that one — even though he had that delicate nerve injury in his shoulder that robbed him of his strength.

This was just an ankle, what he called a common football injury, and he felt confident.

"You've got a wife at home, kids at home, and other people who truly, truly care about you and care about your health," said Williams. "For those people, you've got to make the right decision.

"I took that into that consideration. Coach was giving me every opportunity — and he trusted my decision."

"That's what a leader does," said cornerback Casey Hayward of Williams. "He pushed through it, and he did that for this team, because with him on the field, we're a better team."