When the University of Colorado's first new college in 50 years opens its doors this fall, it will do so with a unique inaugural group of visiting scholars and professors who are pushing the boundaries of film, documentary-making, art and music.

The College of Media, Communication and Information was officially created last summer, three years after CU's traditional School of Journalism and Mass Communication was disbanded.

Rather than resurrect the stand-alone journalism school, campus leaders created a college that blends journalism with art, music, media, information science, public relations, advertising and documentary filmmaking.

Supporters of the college say they want to break down the walls in academia that often exist between different campus departments. Some of the college's first visiting professors, along with permanent faculty members, should help set the interdisciplinary tone in the college's first year.

"I've now met many people visiting campus who are candidates for our various job searches," said Chris Braider, who oversaw the creation of the new college. "To a person, they are not only excited about the college's silo-busting character, but they themselves embody it."

Enrollment for the college's first year is expected to be roughly 1,911 students, according to the college's proposal before the Board of Regents last summer. Campus leaders said they expect that number to grow to 3,072 in five years.

Advertisement

The new college has nearly 60 permanent faculty members, many of whom have taught at CU in communications, journalism and other departments.

The visiting faculty members include Bill Nichols, a San Francisco-based pioneer in the contemporary study of documentary film who is often credited with helping to establish film studies as an academic discipline.

Also visiting from the San Francisco area next spring is Helen De Michiel, a director, writer and producer who also works on community media projects and media installations. Her most recent project, "Lunch Love Community," is described as an open space documentary, which includes short, shareable films, tools, resources and social media.

Another is Pat Clark, an experimental documentarian, artist and educator who also works in video installations and active-viewing pieces.

Paul Miller, also known as DJ Spooky, That Subliminal Kid, will be teaching a class that centers on his new book, "The Imaginary App."

Miller is as "silo-busting" as they come. It's hard to pin down exactly who Miller is, but he's often referred to as an electronic hip-hop musician, conceptual artist, writer, researcher and editor.

He's no stranger to Boulder, having taught at Naropa University and hosted events on University Hill in the recent past. Miller, who's based in New York City, said he's looking forward to returning to "mellow" Boulder.

Some classes focus exclusively on the creativity and ideas needed for new mobile apps, while others focus only on writing code and the technical aspects of apps. Miller hopes to bridge the gap between those two worlds.

"It's all about the way apps and the idea of mobile media have changed the whole creative process," Miller said in a recent interview with the Daily Camera. "I want find a happy middle ground between the practical and the creative."

He said he tries to bring the "arc of history" into his teaching, and he likes to get students thinking about how the means of communication have changed the content of communication.

For example, Miller said, how did poetry change when writers stopped using pencil and paper, and instead began using typewriters?

"When I teach, I try as much as possible to have historical context to say nothing arrives out of a vacuum," he said. "I like to give people a sense of the tension between context and content. We can all take for granted that we're going to get deeper and weirder with technology at every level."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta