Josh Kroenke is a “basketball guy,” a label he earned with more than affinity for the sport, but also with a solid career on the floor for Missouri, including two seasons as the Tigers’ captain.

The son of sports empire owner Stan Kroenke was the Nuggets’ president for three years before assuming the same role with the Avalanche in what amounted to a watch, wait and learn interim period as longtime executive Pierre Lacroix moved closer to retirement.

“Wearing two hats for two years has been a lot of fun,” Kroenke said Saturday. “It’s been an adventure, to say the least, but it’s been a lot of fun, a lot of work. I think I’m learning how to better manage my time as I go forward.”

The NHL can be a clubhouse of the closed-minded. To get in to that wing of the league’s power structure, you have to know the handshake and the password, and it’s even better if you have scars to show and stories about “that night” — or any night — in, let’s say, Buffalo. Don’t pass muster, and you can be dismissed, with fresh ideas scorned too. There is an in- tuitive feel that comes from playing it or being around it for years (as was Lacroix), but it’s not the only way to have sound and even innovative ideas about how to spot talent, make a team better and — especially — how to use sound business principles to run a hockey team in a salary cap league.

So, yes, even if Josh Kroenke wanted to jump in and say to hockey men, “Hey, have we ever thought about doing this?” or even, “That guy sure looks good to me,” I’m not going to characterize that as an owner’s son, or a “basketball guy,” meddling.

On the basketball side of the operation, the input of Kroenke, his father and others remains influential, as the extent of general manager Tim Connelly’s power is difficult to pinpoint.

On the hockey side, it’s clear that Josh Kroenke still is an overseeing CEO for the Avalanche, often deferring to Joe Sakic and Patrick Roy.

Saturday, I asked Kroenke to compare how directly he is involved in the hockey operation vs. the basketball operation.

“My roles have changed in the organizations as I’ve evolved,” he said. “Now I would say it’s very evenly balanced in how I spread my duties.”

The Avalanche’s 2014-15 season ended Saturday with Colorado at 90 points and finishing last in the Central Division. This is going to be the first time since the arrival of the Avs in 1995 — and since Stan Kroenke purchased the teams and arena in 2000 — that there will be no NBA or NHL playoff games in Denver.

“We had a great streak going for a number of years,” Josh Kroenke said. “It’s disappointing, but I’m already looking forward to showing everybody how we can bounce back next year.”

Of the Avalanche specifically, he said: “I think we’re all disappointed. From myself, to Patty, to Joe, to everybody down in the locker room. With that being said, I don’t think we’re disappointed about the way we went about our process. I saw that Joe had a few quotes about how there is a process to learning how to win at the highest level, and sometimes you want to skip all the steps. But there are some young guys out there going through it. We all said it at the beginning of this year, that this year was going to be a lot harder than last year. I don’t think a few of the guys understood that right away, and sometimes the best way to learn is to go through it.”

How can the Avalanche bounce back?

“A year of growth,” he said. “We can get healthy, and that’s a big one for us. … A few guys might not have realized how hard the second year was going to be, but they bounced back, and that’s what I’m most impressed with — how our group came together and they persevered and they fought down the stretch. Even though it was right on the brink of elimination, they continued to battle, and that’s the character I want from all of our teams.”

And his evaluation of Sakic and Roy?

“They’ve been fantastic,” Kroenke said. “I think last season speaks for itself. I think obviously this year, we’re a little disappointed not being in the playoffs because that’s going to be our goal, to get in there every year and compete. But I think they’ve done an outstanding job and I think they’re both learning on the fly as well. They’re great guys and they’re hard workers, and those two in combination with their experiences in life as hockey players and now as a coach and executive, I think they’re doing a great job.”

Yes, he said “on the fly.”

Just like a hockey guy.

Terry Frei: tfrei @denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei