Valerie R. Wilson, an economist, is the director of the Program on Race, Ethnicity and the Economy at the Economic Policy Institute.

The racial wealth gap is a long-standing vestige of racism and restrictive federal, state and local policies that explicitly excluded African-Americans from opportunities whites had to build wealth.

According to the latest Survey of Consumer Finances, the median African-American family has about 8 cents in wealth for every dollar held by the median white family. The effects of this go beyond a single generation — inheritance is one of the factors contributing to a widening wealth gap. That’s because wealth affords any number of mobility-enhancing opportunities, including the ability to own property, pay for higher education, build a secure retirement and access to high quality health care. Wealth also provides a degree of economic stability against the uncertainties of job loss, major illness or death.

Black unemployment fell to an historic low and the black middle class expanded when overall unemployment fell to 4 percent in the 1990s.

While publicly providing many of these things — either directly, as with free college, or through programs like Social Security, Medicaid, unemployment insurance and the Affordable Care Act — could do much to achieve a more stable standard of living for most Americans, we can’t ignore how deeply ingrained the problems of race are, despite our best efforts to overcome it.

One of the most persistent examples is the fact that the black unemployment rate is about twice the white unemployment rate at every level of educational attainment. In other words, the most prescribed way of elevating one’s economic status fails to eliminate the racial disparity in employment, even among the most educated.

But direct monetary reparations to individuals may not be the best way to fix these inequalities. They may not even be any more radical than the broad-based “socialist” economic policies needed to close the gaps between blacks and whites in unemployment, income, wealth and the myriad social and economic outcomes. A combination of broad-based efforts and racially targeted policies is needed, along with a sustained commitment to eliminating racial economic disparities.

A race-neutral plan of action, like full employment, would benefit all families while yielding faster gains in black employment, wages and income.

We witnessed a fleeting example of this during the late 1990s, when overall unemployment averaged 4 percent for two solid years. The black unemployment rate fell to the lowest rate on record and the black middle class expanded. On the other side, economists have documented that anti-discrimination and affirmative action policies during the 1960s and 1970s narrowed the wage gap, but that these gaps widened when these policies were less vigilantly enforced beginning in the 1980s.

It may not seem politically feasible or cheap, but a country that is serious about eliminating racial inequality should be willing to exhaust every possible option.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.