There is an extreme disconnect in the White House when it comes to what is truly in the nation’s interest. The government shutdown which last week forced Honor Flight veterans to stand at barriers to stand at barriers erected by Obama’s orders at their World War II Memorial, is contrasted by Tuesday’s tens of thousands of illegal aliens getting a free pass to march on the National Mall in open defiance is an outrage.

Photo by Patrick Smith/Getty Images

Understand this; Obama intended this and his administration’s goal is to stick it in the eye of all veterans, their families and every American citizen!

Were you angry to see video after video and photo after photo of illegal aliens and their supporters demanding rights from criminals, who broke the law, show up at the nation’s doorstep and says, “You owe me!” The politically correct police are working for Obama and the mainstream media, and American citizens are being figuratively spat on!

On the day the nation was born, America’s founding fathers could not ever contemplate that its soldiers who demonstrated valor on the battlefield would be tossed out of their own memorial, while law breaking-illegal aliens and their sympathizers would brazenly and contemptuously stroll pass them.

Ordinarily this illegal demonstration by illegal aliens would not have even been covered or noticed in the politically correct lawless world inhabited by liberals and mainstream pundits. It has become too common a practice to allow hundreds of thousands of illegal aliens to march in D.C., Chicago, Los Angeles and other cities, when other criminals would have had paddy wagons waiting to whisk the lawbreakers away.

Well, America, this is now the time where the upside down world of liberals and the lawless lawbreakers that are illegal aliens has to come to a stop. There is no way in the world that an American president who took an oath to defend, protect and support the U.S. Constitution should be allowed to ground its meaning into the dirt as Obama has.

The Obama administration was well aware of the coming illegal march by illegal aliens. The administration officials also appeared to know that the best way to hurt the American public was to cherry pick which government operations to shut down and which to ignore. Monuments which celebrated the courage, conviction and gallantry of American’s finest were a perfect target to barricade.

What is insidious about this logic is somehow these socialist-minded bureaucrats in the White House could not forecast that Americans would be outraged and point the finger not at the Republican House but at the man who said “Shut it down!”

The government shut down has brought this contempt for America’s fallen heroes and their loves ones front and center to most Americans in a way the Benghazi tragedy did not. Obama hid, lied, danced away, pointed fingers, denied, and delayed any information of documentation of his involvement in letting these brave Americans needlessly be murdered.

There is a pattern of deceit and manifest arrogance that Mr. Obama brings to the table when he is speaking to the American people and their fallen heroes. The president lied about what happened in Benghazi as the bodies of Four Americans died in the attack: Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, Information Officer Sean Smith and two embassy security personnel, Glen Doherty and Tyrone Woods arrived in the United States September 14th. He lied about what he did while it was happening after giving varying versions within the same week.

This behavior and conduct by a Commander in Chief is not just deplorable, because of how it dishonored the fallen Americans, but it reinforces the basic core reality that he is president in name only.

Americans did not pay attention when he traveled abroad to Muslim countries in 2009 to apologize for America and embrace and legitimize Muslim conduct and beliefs. He chose to build partnerships with Muslim countries where their leaders and followers reject Christianity, and object to Israel’s very existence.

These are not the actions of a Commander-in-Chief who stands with the defenders of American freedoms. These are the actions of an elected official who has no respect for the nation’s fighting forces or the U.S. Constitution on which they and he have taken an oath.

Now fast forward to the stark and tragic images of elderly World War II veterans who survived the horrors and battlefields only to be denied access to a hallowed spot which was erected in their honor.

The President’s goal in humbling them was to show America that he could force the veterans and their families to their knees and compel them to return home pointing fingers at Republicans. This strategy which was cooked up in White House via the backrooms of Chicago socialism’s elite did not work and will not work.

What Obama and his left leaning strategists seem to not understand is that the nation is not injured when a politician like him decides to hit the nation in its gut with his brass knuckles. No, no, the knuckles may be made from Chicago brass, but the stamina and character of the American patriot is forged from U.S. Constitutional steel.

When Obama tries to shut down death benefits to fallen soldier families, Americans respond with open hearts and open support to challenge his twisted choices.

When Obama tries to deprive American families the right to benefits and supports, while he keeps his golf range open, Americans do not bend their knees, but strengthen their backs.

The Government shutdown and political shakedown was engineered by Obama and Senate Majority Harry Reid of Nevada to bring shame and blame to the Republicans and the Tea Party. It has backfired, because soldiers fight back with truth and patriot warriors stand tall and pressure their elected House members to not bend their knees.

This government shutdown was being used against America’s soldiers and their families because Obama has no shame. Now the nation and the media know his shame and also why citizens can never ever allow the nation to be fooled by the likes of him again. It is a hope and change that America cannot afford to experience in this century or ever again. 2014 the revolution begins…

__________________________________________

Copyright © 2013 Kevin Fobbs. Subscribe above to receive email updates whenever Kevin Fobbs publishes on Examiner.com.