On the heels of a devastating typhoon which ravaged the Philippines, on Monday evening "Piers Morgan Live" asked Roy Spencer and Mark Hertsgaard to debate the impact that climate change has had in a series of recent natural disasters.

"The earth is a little warmer right now," said Spencer, a climatologist at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. "We're not exactly sure whether it's 100 percent due to mankind, or 50 percent due to mankind, 50 percent due to nature and by chance."

Joining the program from California, Hertsgaard showed clear disagreement:

"Dr. Spencer, that is not true, sir. That is not true. You are misstating the facts," insisted the author and journalist. "To say that we don't know? Listen to what the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] just said in its report: 'That humankinds' activities are now responsible for most of this.' Frankly, I don't know why, Dr. Spencer, I believe that you don't even agree that climate change is man made, last time I checked. If you've revised your position I'd love to hear about it. To listen to you talk about climate change, that man made climate change you reject that 99 ... so you stand against the 97 percent of scientists who say this?"

Spencer firmly stood his ground:

"Mark, did you know I'm one of the 97 percent you're talking about? That 97 percent statistic included people who believe that some portion of climate change is man made. And I do believe some portion of it is."

Hertsgard then accused Spencer of not having done his due diligence:

"Do you deny that you stand in opposition to the overwhelming scientific consensus on this? If so, you need to read more scientific papers."

With his professional credibility being called into question, the climatologist fired back:

"I got a feeling I've read more than you have, Mark."

Watch the clip for more of Morgan's feisty interview with Spencer and Hertsgaard, and for the next edition of "Piers Morgan Live," watch CNN every night at 9.

-

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Twitter

» Follow "Piers Morgan Live" on Instagram