The U.S. Supreme Court remanded the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate back to the lower courts, directing the Obama administration and religious nonprofits to work out a compromise.

In an unsigned opinion, justices vacated several circuit court rulings and suggested that a middle-ground approach should serve as a roadmap for resolving the dispute. Both sides have offered conditional support for the approach, justices noted.

“The parties on remand should be afforded an opportunity to arrive at an approach going forward that accommodates petitioners’ religious exercise while at the same time ensuring that women covered by petitioners’ health plans receive full and equal health coverage, including contraceptive coverage,” justices said in a per curiam opinion.

“Although there may still be areas of disagreement between the parties on issues of implementation, the importance of those areas of potential concern is uncertain, as is the necessity of this court’s involvement at this point to resolve them,” the opinion said.

The court added that it was not taking any position on the merits of the case brought by faith-based nonprofits that oppose a process for opting out of the mandate. The nonprofits object to the process because it can result in alternate access to contraception being arranged for employees through the employer’s health insurance plan.

Under the court’s proposed compromise, some religious nonprofits could omit contraception coverage. There would not be any obligation to opt out of the mandate formally, and responsibility would fall on the insurer to arrange separate access to birth control.

It is highly unusual for the Supreme Court to act as a mediator between legal adversaries. But with the court split 4-4 between liberals and conservatives, there was not majority support for a ruling on claims brought under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

In a concurring opinion, Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg warned the circuit courts not to interpret the court’s per curiam opinion or proposed compromise as a reflection of its views on the merits. They also noted that any compromise still faces significant obstacles, such as whether contraception-only insurance plans should be established.

“Today’s opinion does only what it says it does: ‘affords an opportunity’ for the parties and courts of appeals to reconsider the parties’ arguments in light of petitioners’ new articulation of their religious objection and the government’s clarification about what the existing regulations accomplish, how they might be amended, and what such an amendment would sacrifice,” the concurring opinion said.

Nonetheless, the challengers are encouraged by the decision.

“There is still work to be done, but today’s decision indicates that we will ultimately prevail in court,” said Mark Rienzi, an attorney for Catholic nonprofit Little Sisters of the Poor, one of many challengers.

Supporters of the contraception mandate were more subdued. But they still expressed optimism. The National Women’s Law Center said in a statement that it is “confident that the government’s birth control accommodation once again will prevail.”

The cases are Zubik et al. v. Burwell et al., case number 14-1418, Priests for Life et al. v.Department of Health and Human Services et al., case number 14-1453, Roman Catholic Archbishop v. Department of Health and Human Services et al., case number 14-1505, Texas Baptist University et al. v. Burwell et al., case number 15-35, Little Sister of the Poor et al. v. Burwell et al., case number 15-105, Southern Nazarene University et al. v. Burwell et al., case number 15-119, and Geneva College v. Burwell et al., case number 15-191, all in the Supreme Court of the United States.

Source: High Court Punts On ACA Birth Control Battle

Join the Discussion