Topics: aol_on, Donald Trump, Gun Violence, The National Rifle Association, umpqua community college, Umpqua Community College shooting, Elections News, News, Politics News

Whenever there’s a mass shooting, we can count on two things to happen. First, nothing. Nothing will happen. No matter how horrendous the shooting happens to be, the National Rifle Association has rendered Congress entirely impotent, ensuring nothing will happen to prevent another would-be gunman from easily purchasing firearms. Not even the cold-blooded murder of 20 kindergarteners or the live on-air murder of two journalists has successfully shaken our political leaders from their NRA-induced torpor. Second, the NRA’s flying monkeys inevitably fan out across the country, disbursing the usual talking points about mental health, arming schoolteachers and outlawing gun-free zones, all as a distraction from the real issue, which is, of course, ridiculously easy access to firearms.

The mental health issue, in this context, is horseshit. In spite of how often they lean on this particular button in the wake of a shooting, the Republicans haven’t done a damn thing about addressing mental health. Ever. In fact, it was a Democrat, the late Paul Wellstone, who championed the notion of making mental illness a legitimate health matter. It was also a Democratic Congress and a Democratic president who included mental health coverage as an Obamacare mandate — covering nearly 4 million Americans who previously didn’t have mental health insurance. The Republicans, on the other hand, have voted to repeal Obamacare upward of 60 times, while attempting to block the Wellstone amendment. If they were really concerned about mental illnesses contributing to gun massacres, you’d think there’d be something in the works to mitigate the problem by delivering more medical care to the people who need it the most. Nope. Not a chance.

So, leave it to Donald Trump to shift an already badly skewed debate from mental illness to, somehow, evil geniuses. Yes, Trump blamed gun massacres on shooters who are “geniuses in a certain way.” They’re masterminds, he said, who can “break the system.”

“No matter what you do, you’re gonna have problems,” Trump told NBC News in an interview that aired Sunday. “Because you have sick people. They happen to be intelligent. And, you know, they can be sick as hell and they’re geniuses in a certain way. They are going to be able to break the system.”

Not only are the shooters geniuses, but there’s really nothing we can do to stop them, said Trump. Gone are Trump’s usual over-the-top superlatives about how he has a “terrific” plan to stop gun violence — that there’s going to be so few kindergarteners shot when he’s president, our heads will spin. None of that. Trump’s reaction? Oh well. He might be a complete fraud, but he sounds a hell of a lot like a Republican here. It’s frankly worse than Jeb Bush’s unfortunate “stuff happens” reaction. Indeed, Trump went one step further by suggesting that stuff happens and nothing can be done about it because mass shooters are basically Batman villains who can “break the system,” apparently using green laughing gas and an entourage of anonymous, masked henchmen.