Gary Palmer -- a conservative Republican, devout Christian and former head of the Alabama Policy Institute (API) think tank -- is to be sworn in on Tuesday in Washington, D.C., as the new representative of the Alabama 6th Congressional District in the U.S. House.

And while Palmer was certainly the favorite of many religious right and so-called "values voters" in the conservative 6th District as he rose from political obscurity to win the Republican nomination and beat Democrat Mark Lester in the general election in November, the Hoover resident said Friday that this support from faith communities was not the only reason for his victory.

"I think it is broader than that," Palmer told AL.com in a telephone interview. His campaign appealed to a "broad coalition" of people who want to hear a positive approach and real solutions to problems, he said.

According to Palmer, he won every box in Hoover and all but one in Shelby County when he defeated Ala. State Rep. Paul DeMarco of Homewood in July in a run-off for the Republican nomination.

"Those are your business owners, your doctors, your lawyers," Palmer said. "A lot of those people are values voters, but I think what attracted people (was that I) was not blaming other people for failures instead of articulating solutions.

"Voters have values on social issues, but they also heard my ideas for opening up energy exploration, getting the economy going, specific ideas for replacing Obamacare," Palmer said.

Republicans should tell people what they're for

The Republican Party as a whole should take this approach, according to Palmer. "I don't think the Republican Party has done a good job of articulating what we are for," he said. "Working at the API, it has been fundamentally about what we are for. The public is more interested in solutions than they are about blame."

The Republican Party, now in the majority in the U.S. House and Senate, must also vary the play book they have drawn on since Democrat Barack Obama was elected President in 2008.

"Just blaming (U.S. Rep. Nancy) Pelosi and (U.S. Sen.) Harry Reid, like we have done for the last six years, is off the table," Palmer said. "I think the public will not have a lot of patience with us if all we do it blame Obama. We have to articulate what we are for."

Palmer's time at think tank 'paid off'

In addition, Palmer said that his "25 years at API really paid off" in his Congressional bid. During his time at the think tank, he developed what he called "an excellent network" of contacts while working to advance such conservative causes as federal tax relief and regulatory reform.

For example, Palmer said that developed many valuable contacts in churches around the state when he took a leave from the API in the 1990s to work to defeat a referendum to establish state lottery.

His time at API working on issues the voters cared about "and seeing what worked other places" in the country have him a "huge advantage that was significantly underappreciated," he said.

'A straight shooter'

Palmer also believes that his victory can be contributed in part to his mostly positive relationship with news media. "Not that everyone agrees me, but most people in the media think of me as a straight shooter," he said.

"That is the kind of stuff that is off the radar for the local political experts and doesn't necessarily show up in the polling," Palmer said.

A dark-horse candidate

Palmer came almost out of nowhere to win after declaring his candidacy in October 2013, following an announcement by long-time Republican representative Spencer Bacchus that he was planning to retire at the end of his term.

"My name ID in January (2014) was at 4 percent, and half of those people who knew my name thought I was a golfer," Palmer said in October.

Helping Palmer was the fact two Tea Party candidates -- State Sen. Scott Beason of Gardendale and physician Chad Mathis -- split the vote in the June 3 Republican primary, leaving Palmer and establishment favorite DeMarco in the July 15 runoff.

Beason and Mathis endorsed Palmer before the runoff, and Palmer beat DeMarco by 28 points.

Palmer also received endorsements from some of the biggest names on the national religious right, including Gary Bauer, Tony Perkins and James Dobson.

Palmer's priorities

Palmer -- who will serve on the House Budget Committee -- said Friday that two of the main priorities for the new Republican majority will be getting federal spending under control and achieving some regulatory reform.

Also critical is an effort at "restoring constitutional government, restoring the separation of powers," Palmer said, referring to the controversial executive orders issued recently by President Obama to push forward his agenda on such issues as immigration reform.

The new Congressman was also appointed to the House Oversight & Government Reform committee, which is essentially a legislative watchdog of the executive branch, and the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology.