The Montana Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers Council, Inc. is this month launching its summer mobile health clinics to provide health services to agricultural workers and their dependents.

The two mobile units, one medical and one dental, will fan out across the state depending on where agricultural workers are stationed as the growing season progresses. The mobile units, which regularly serve the Big Horn, Carbon, Flathead, Gallatin, Lake, Mineral, Ravalli, Rosebud, Sanders, Stillwater and Treasure counties, are in addition to year-round walk-in clinics in Billings, Dillon, Fairview and Lolo, as well as temporary clinics in rural community centers.

“Crops fail, crops flourish, you really have to determine where the needs are season by season,” said Carol Townsend, executive director of the Montana Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers Council, Inc. “The goal is to provide continuity of health care for the community.”

The Migrant Health Act was enacted in 1962 in part to monitor the health status of migrant farmworkers and to fund health centers for migrant and seasonal workers. According to 2014 statistics from the Texas-based nonprofit National Center for Farmworker Health, more than 169 migrant health centers operate in 42 states, serving more than 807,000 patients in approximately 700 locations.

To qualify for health services, individuals must give a majority of their labor to some form of agricultural work, either as a migrant or seasonal worker.

A migratory agriculture worker’s principal employment is in agriculture on a seasonal basis. He or she must have been employed within the last 24 months and who, for the purposes of such employment, establishes a temporary residence. A seasonal agriculture worker’s principal employment is in agriculture on a seasonal basis.

Dependents, that is, any legal or financial dependent of an agricultural worker such as a spouse, child or elderly parent, are also eligible for services. Also, persons who are no longer able to do agricultural work because of age or disability may also be eligible.

Although the term “migrant” is associated with people of Hispanic descent, a migrant is anybody who crosses a city, county, state or national border.

In Montana, agricultural workers may hail from around the globe, including Germany and South Africa, as well as many from Peru and Mexico, according to Townsend.

There are no work camps or farmworker housing, as is often the case in Colorado and Texas; rather small pockets of workers labor in industries ranging from beekeeping to sheepherding to grain production, more than 10,000 eligible agricultural workers in Montana and northwest North Dakota (McKenzie and Williams counties) at any given time, she said.

And that’s one of the state’s major challenges. Small clusters of workers moving quickly over vast rural swaths of sparsely-populated prairie and are difficult – and expensive – to reach, said Bobbi Ryder, CEO of the National Center for Farmworker Health.

“It’s much easier to just open your doors and have them come to you,” Ryder said. “But in Montana, serving people in isolated areas is hard, although those farmworkers are just as deserving as those who live in camps of thousands of people.”

The Migrant Council healthcare providers see about 3,000 patients annually, down from 4,800 a decade ago, and about half the number they hope to see in coming years, Townsend said.

What unites Montana’s disparate agricultural workers are their unique needs. Often they are geographically and socially isolated by virtue of their culture, language, poverty and lack of transport. Often they have no continuity of care and show up in emergency rooms with acute health problems that could have been avoided with regular care.

“We want to catch people while they are healthy,” Townsend said. “We can screen them for work related and familial conditions before they get too serious.”

Services include primary medical care services, OB/GYN care, TB therapy, dental services, plus a range of other services such as occupational and physical therapy, case management, emergency food, Spanish translation, some transportation, ESL and outreach.

The services aren’t free, but they are offered on a sliding scale according to the national poverty guidelines. Some workers, including H-2A visa holders, are eligible for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

In rural areas, these services can be a boon for agricultural workers and their employers alike.

“Producers are able to have stable workforce of healthy workers, who are not only capable because they are strong enough, but who want to come to work in the morning because the employer has placed an importance on workers to maintain their health,” Townsend said.

More information

Agricultural employers may call the Council to schedule a group application for their employees. Individuals may also apply on their own, without an employer’s referral.

For more information, contact the Montana Migrant and Seasonal Farmworkers Council, Inc. Phone: (800) 813-4492 Fax 406-245-6636 Web: mtmigrantcouncil.org.

Here is information on regional health centers:

Billings

3318 3rd Avenue N., Ste 200

Billings, MT 59101

Phone: (406) 248-3149

Fax:(406) 245-6636

Contact: Elizabeth Castro

Dillon

116 Washington Street , CL 7

Dillon, MT 59725

Phone: (406) 683-5570

Fax: (406) 683-6489

Contact: Virginia Chichester

Fairview

35511 County Road, 134

Fairview, MT 59221

Phone: (406) 742-5201

Fax: (406) 742-3523

Contact: Alicia Rabinoff

Lolo

9801 Valley Grove Drive, D

Lolo, MT 59847

Phone: (406) 273-4633

Fax: (406) 273-4707

Contact: Kelsey Angel