A workbook given to a class of middle schoolers contained a blatantly inaccurate definition of the Second Amendment to the Constitution.

Springfield, Ill. seventh grade students studying the Bill of Rights — the first 10 amendments to the Constitution — were instructed that the Second Amendment grants Americans the right to own only “certain weapons” and under certain restrictions, according to StoryLeak.

“This amendment states that people have the right to certain weapons, providing that they register them and they have not been in prison,” the workbook says.

This photo of that section of the workbook dealing with the Second Amendment was posted on the Illinois Gun Owners Rights Facebook page.

In addition to the claim that the Second Amendment applies only to “certain weapons,” failing to mention firearms, it also claims weapons must be registered.

By its very tone, the workbook seems to imply that the rights guaranteed under the Second Amendment are granted to the people by the government. In fact, those rights are unalienable and “shall not be infringed.”

The parent of the seventh-grader who received the class assignment spoke to StoryLeak on condition of anonymity.

“My son was given a workbook at school that is a compilation of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. When they covered the 2nd Amendment, he saw that they were stating that only ‘certain guns’ could be owned and that they had to be ‘registered,’ which he knew was false,” the parent said. “He bought this to my attention as he felt it was wrong to teach these things that aren’t true. I’m extremely proud of my son for his actions.”

The dad said an understanding of the Second Amendment was something he’d instilled in his kids from an early age.

“Me and my children are active gun enthusiasts and supporters of the 2nd amendment. I have discussed the 2nd amendment with them several times and explained what it meant and its importance to our country.”

Fallon mocks Obama in hilarious reenactment phone call with Putin

But he didn’t just leave it there.

“I even told the school officials I talked to that you can’t reword the Constitution to what you think it should be and you should only teach what it is,” the parent said. “We live in a society where children are being taught to fear firearms instead of embracing them and our shooting sports. Heck 50-60 years ago you had police officers coming into schools teaching firearm safety and now we have schools teaching false information and fear. It’s a sad time.”

Last year, a text book being used at a Texas high school claimed that the right to keep and bear arms only applied to individuals who are actively serving in a state militia.

Also last year, an Arkansas sixth grade class was invited to revise the “outdated” Bill of Rights.

Last month, former U.S. Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens suggested revising the “outdated” Second Amendment to have it apply to only active militia members.