The death of an 83-year-old French professor in Pittsburgh has become a rallying cry for part-time college instructors nationwide in their push for better pay, greater job security and access to health care.

Margaret Mary Vojtko, 1930-2013. (Photo: handout) Story Highlights Part-time faculty on campuses nationwide consider unionizing

They're reacting to cuts in hours and benefits

Labor unions see opportunity for growth in membership

The death last month of an 83-year-old French professor in Pittsburgh has become a rallying cry for part-time college instructors nationwide in their push for better pay, greater job security and access to health insurance. It comes as college administrators around the country are monitoring teaching loads in preparation for the Affordable Care Act, set to go into effect in 2015.

The story of Margaret Mary Vojtko, who taught for 25 years at Duquesne University and had recently been let go, went viral after the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette published it. Nearly homeless and struggling with cancer, she died Sept. 1 of a heart attack and was "laid out in a simple, cardboard casket" at her funeral, wrote Daniel Kovalik, a lawyer with United Steelworkers.

Duquesne adjuncts voted to join the steelworkers union last year as part of a coordinated national strategy to focus on metro areas with multiple colleges. Over the past year, adjuncts at American, George Washington and Georgetown universities in Washington, D.C., have affiliated with the Service Employees International Union. In the Boston area, Tufts adjuncts just voted to affiliate with SEIU, nearby Bentley College is awaiting vote results, and Northeastern adjuncts have formed an organizing committee. Similar efforts are underway in the Seattle area, Los Angeles and Philadelphia, SEIU President Mary Kay Henry says.

The Affordable Care Act, which requires employers to offer health insurance to employees who works 30 or more hours a week, has intensified some organizing efforts. As more colleges take steps to limit teaching loads, some adjuncts may see a cut in hours at more than 200 campuses, including Youngstown State University in Ohio and Lakeland Community College in Kirtland, Ohio, according to documents compiled by Investors Daily Business.

"It's galvanized adjuncts," says David Wilder, an art instructor and co-chair of the Ohio Part-Time Faculty Association, which was founded in January. "All adjuncts have a certain amount of fear because we don't have protections."

Federal data show that part-time faculty, and other instructors who work on contract, represent the fastest-growing and largest population of college instructors. Today, just 25% of all instructional staff positions are filled by full-time, tenured faculty, says a report by the American Association of University Professors, which represents faculty.

College administrators are, at best, lukewarm, about collective bargaining. Tufts will "try to foster a good working relationship" with SEIU, spokesman Kim Thurler says. Since Duquesne adjuncts unionized, minimum pay for adjuncts has increased to $3,500 per course from $2,500, and the school recently announced a research grant for part-time faculty.

Administrators argue that Duquesne should be exempt from federal regulations that govern labor unions because it is a Catholic institution. In an e-mail, Provost Timothy Austin called Kovalik's piece "misleading, error- and innuendo-filled, and disgracefully exploitive."

But on Twitter, adjuncts say her story is all too familiar. The hashtag: #iammargaretmary.

"Margaret Mary is a symbol of what the reality is for workers in higher education," says adjunct Robin Sowards, who teaches composition and linguistics at Duquesne and the University of Pittsburgh. "People see not just a sad story about an individual person but a systemic problem that all of us face."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1g0GKgg