Cyclist Dave Jardinico with Green Mountain Sports Velo of Lakewood races in a heat of the Cross of the North cyclocross race on Sunday. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The cyclocross season runs from September to January rain or shine, and on Sunday, cyclists tested their limits with wind gusts up to 30 mph as they raced in Cross of the North at The Ranch.

While the wind buffeted tents and caused spectators to cheer on racing contestants with coats wrapped tightly around them, racers competed in a variety of heats on a course north of The Ranch complex.

The First City Cycling Team, based in Fort Collins, started the Cross of the North event in 2011 as a way to contribute to the Colorado cyclocross scene and showcase talent in Northern Colorado, according to Tim Lynch, executive director.

It started as a one-day event with fewer than 500 participants. This year was the first year the event was expanded to three days, including a nighttime race on Friday.

The race is a USA Cycling-sanctioned event and racers can gain points to make it to the national competition.

"(Cyclocross) was started by Europeans in the early 1900s to give them off-season training," Lynch said.

Racers are categorized by age and ability. Cyclists who compete gain points that place them in category ability levels of one to five. "Cat-1" is the pro-level.

The weekend of races includes levels for juniors on up to 55 and over age groups. The event also included a citizens' race for people who don't compete frequently, and a children's race for young children on their own mini course.

Lynch said that cyclocross is closer to road biking than mountain biking, although the tires are knobby to account for dirt and mud.

Advertisement

Each lap is around 3 kilometers and most races are 30-60 minutes. A racer in a 30-minute race might cycle four to five miles while a 60-minute racer might reach 12 miles.

"It's a sport that brings the community together. It's a big spectator sport because we do a lot of laps. There's a lot of suffering, a lot of carnage," Lynch said.

The race is a little bit about endurance and pain, and the racers' abilities to bike in mud and dirt and stop and carry their bikes up steps and steep muddy inclines.

"It's a different kind of culture," Lynch said.

Mike Dickinson with Peloton Cycles of Fort Collins has been raising in cyclocross competitions for three to four years.

He raced on Sunday with a single-speed bike.

He said that this means out on the course, he is in the wrong gear 70 percent of the time. He said he likes the additional challenge. Single gear bikes are also great for the muddy conditions because the sticky clay doesn't get into gears to hamper shifting and performance.

When asked what he likes about cyclocross racing, he shivered in the sweeping winds and said, "Right now I don't like anything but afterwards, the camaraderie. It's a workout. It's all about the camaraderie; coming out and having a good time. Taking things seriously while not taking things seriously."

Dickinson said he enjoys getting out at a time of year when otherwise he might be holed up on the couch.

Lynch said that one young lady, 13-year-old Katie Clouse, could race with the juniors, but she's actually good enough to race at the pro-level.

She won the race on Friday night in her category, and got second place on Saturday.

Katie travels with her dad from Park City, Utah, to participate because the races in Utah are not USA Cycling-certified, which means if she wants to win points to get to nationals, she has to compete elsewhere.

"The races are really good," she said about the Loveland event. "I like the courses. They're really fun to race on." She added that racing in mud is her favorite because of the challenge it presents.

Lynch said that organizers hope to continue to grow the event and be recognized in the community.

"It's not about making money; it's about sharing our passion," he said.

The race management team is donating around $400-$500 this year to the Food Bank of Larimer County. They also hosted a can food drive for the same purpose.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Benes at 970-669-5050 ext. 530 or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter at twitter.com/jessicabenes.