You may recall that Barack Obama campaigned and entered the Oval Office 2,243 days ago confidently asserting that government — his government — could fix pretty much any problem facing the country.

You may also recall the trillion-dollar stimulus spending package that was going to start producing hundreds of thousands of jobs each month in the summer of 2010.

You may also recall how the good ship ObamaCare was going to right the nation’s health care system by covering more people at less cost while saving families $2,500 each and allowing them to keep their doctor if they wanted. And so much more.

Here we are after so many failed fixes and the partial-term senator is older but talking no wiser, recently proposing that the federal government underwrite two years of free college for everyone. But the Democrat now faces a Republican-controlled Congress. Little of his overblown liberal hooey is going anywhere legislatively.

And Obama seems to have turned to entertaining himself more, spending $2 million in taxpayer money this week to fly to Los Angeles for an appearance on a late-night show. And also, of course, to raise some money for the party. This afternoon he’ll stop for a photo op at a veterans hospital in Phoenix.

But those taxpayers who paid for Air Force One’s long flights have sure figured him out. A new Gallup Poll out this week shows that Americans aren’t buying the president’s line about big government fixing the country’s problems. In fact, voters now list government itself as the biggest problem facing the country.

After lagging lower on the list of the country’s concerns chronicled by a Gallup survey of 1,027 adults, government has recently surged to the top worry, 18%, up one point from February. The government, economy and unemployment/jobs have been the dominant problems on the minds of surveyed Americans for more than a year now.

Government has now passed the general economy at 11%, long the top concern in the early years of Obama’s reign.

Also ticking upward in the last month were unemployment/jobs at 10% and immigration/illegal aliens at 7%.

Health care concerns slipped three points to 7%. Terrorism concerns slid two points to 6%, to tie with education and one point above concerns with family decline and the federal debt.

ISIS, poverty, foreign policy, national security and race relations all hover at the bottom of Gallup’s worry list at 4%.

“While dissatisfaction with government is by no means a new issue to the American people,” said the Gallup analysis, “it has not in recent months been as clearly the leading problem as it is now.”

Andrew Malcolm is IBD’s national politics columnist. Follow him on Twitter at @AHMalcolm.