Let’s set aside for a minute the Rockies’ four-game losing skid amid 22 games lost over a 26-game stretch. Something positive happened Saturday despite another loss, this time a 3-2 extra-inning defeat to the Pirates.

Colorado starter, lefty Brett Anderson, finally gave the Rockies something they haven’t seen since May.

(OK, by virtue of his even being back on the mound after missing 81 games with a broken finger suffered in April, Anderson gave the Rockies something again when he returned last week).

Anderson’s seven stellar innings Saturday, one day after Jorge De La Rosa’s six strong innings, gave the Rockies the kind of one-two pitching combo they’ve lacked for most of the season. Since May 7, the Rockies have back-to-back wins from a starting pitcher just once — when Tyler Matzek and Jhoulys Chacin did it against Atlanta on June 11-12.

The Rockies got consecutive wins from a starting pitcher just six times this season (including a three-game stretch in May).

Colorado lost twice the past two nights, but certainly not on the arms of Anderson and De La Rosa.

“As far as executing pitches, it was the best I felt in awhile,” Anderson said.

He threw 110 pitches over seven innings against Pittsburgh. He gave up just four hits and one run. And he struck out eight with just one walk.

“Truthfully, my stuff wasn’t too much better (than his last start),” Anderson said. “I just executed pitches better and was more efficient. I think I threw more pitches tonight than I have in two-plus years. But I feel like I battled well and gave us a chance.”

Rockies manager Walt Weiss pegged Anderson’s effectiveness to a breaking ball that got better as the night got longer.

“His breaking ball was real good,” Weiss said. “He’s got a great breaking ball and used it well tonight. I think he went to it especially late, when maybe he was getting a little fatigued. Like I say, his second start after being away a long time — and he got some swings and misses.”

Anderson agreed, saying it was a slider that kept him in the game, even after he got to triple-digit pitches.

“The last inning I was gonna live or die on the slider,” Anderson said. “I threw six or seven to (Pedro) Alvarez and three or four to (Jordy) Mercer and three or four to the last guy (Ike Davis, all in the seventh).

“I was going hitter by hitter. If I was gonna get beat, I was gonna get beat on my best pitch. Fortunately, it worked out for me.”

Anderson, too, was helped by a Rockies lead, even after pitching from behind for most of the game. After Carlos Gonzalez hit a two-run homer in the seventh, Anderson responded.

“I was determined to go out there and throw a shutdown inning after a big home run,” Anderson said.

After that, it was up to the Rockies bullpen. We’ve talked about them already.