Police have arrested a man who disappeared during a standoff with authorities in Blackwell. Officers say they also arrested his brother during the standoff.

According to Blackwell police, at about 5:12 a.m. Monday, officers were notified of a suicidal man who had just left a local restaurant claiming he had taken two bottles of prescription pills.

The man, later identified as 42-year-old Gilbert Locke, worked at the restaurant and told friends that he also had a gun in his vehicle, according to police.

Officers responded to Locke's house in the 300 block of E. Chrysler Avenue. However, as officers arrived, Locke went back into the house and barricaded himself inside. That's when the standoff began.

An Oklahoma Highway Patrol Tactical Team responded to the scene to assist Blackwell officers. OHP Spokesperson Lt. Brian Orr said they were told there were criminal charges pending against Gilbert Locke.

2/24/2014 Related Story: Blackwell Standoff Ends, Suspect Still At Large

After about an hour of trying to contact Locke with a PA system, a woman and Locke's brother, 41-year-old Johnny Locke, came out of the house. After interviewing Johnny Locke, officers arrested him on charges of rape.

However, when the OHP tactical team entered the house, Gilbert Locke was not there. Authorities called off the standoff and continued to search for him.

In addition to clearing the house, the tact team also checked an outbuilding and the suspect wasn't there either. The OHP tact team also completed a perimeter search of the area and still didn't find the suspect.

At about 9:45 a.m. Tuesday, Gilbert Locke was detained at his home after neighbors saw him enter the home and called police. He was then arrested and booked into the Blackwell City Jail on charges of rape.

According to Blackwell police, both Johnny and Gilbert Locke have been the subject of a Blackwell Police Department felony investigation that began Friday afternoon. They are currently awaiting transport to the Kay County Detention Center where they are expected to face multiple rape charges.

Both men are scheduled to appear before a judge at 1 p.m. Wednesday in Newkirk.