By Russell Mills

Texas Senator Ted Cruz wrapped up a weeklong whirlwind tour of twelve cities Wednesday, including a rally at the Oral Roberts University Mabee Center in Tulsa.

Most national polls show Cruz in second place behind Donald Trump in the race to be the GOP nominee for president.

He spoke to a receptive and enthusiastic crowd, estimated at between 2,500 and 3,000 in size, in the morning event hosted by Oklahoma Congressman Jim Bridenstine.

Before he went on stage, Sen. Cruz spoke to local media, taking questions about his policies on fighting terrorism, his sometimes contentious relations with his fellow Republicans, and a Washington Post cartoon that depicted his daughters as monkeys.

"Not much ticks me off," Cruz said, "but making fun of my girls - that'll do it."

He said he personally typed out a Tweet in response to the cartoon on his iPhone.

"All of us learned in kindergarten, don't hit little girls," he added. "It's not complicated. Don't make fun of a five-year-old girl and a seven-year-old girl."

The Washington Post did pull the controversial cartoon, although it's readily available to anyone with Internet access.

The themes Cruz stressed Wednesday remained consistent with his message all along during the campaign.

He would like to abolish the IRS, repeal the Affordable Care Act, initiate a federal investigation of Planned Parenthood, and wipe ISIS out entirely.

His strategy for winning the election, he told KRMG, hinges on two main tactics.

"Number one, we bring back to the polls the millions of conservatives that stayed home in 2008 and 2012. We bring back the millions of evangelical Christians, the millions of Reagan Democrats. But number two, we stand and fight for the working men and women of this country."

KRMG asked about the role American Muslims play in helping to defend the nation against Islamic terrorism, especially "lone wolf" attackers not necessarily funded, trained or controlled by ISIS or al Qaeda.

The Senator responded by saying that President Obama and Hillary Clinton have been "ostriches with their heads in the sand" on the issue of terrorism.

However, he did not directly respond to the question about American Muslims, nor about Donald Trump's call to ban all Muslims from entering the country.

This was Cruz's third visit to Tulsa this year.