Loma Linda University Medical Center is forging an alliance with a hospital in the San Gorgonio Pass.

And the Affordable Care Act, signed into law in 2010, is cited as one of the major factors driving such hospital alliances up and down the state.

Loma Linda University Health and Adventist Health are negotiating a long-term contract with San Gorgonio Memorial Hospital to manage and operate the Banning hospital while its real-estate assets continue under the ownership of the San Gorgonio Memorial Hospital District, said Kerry Heinrich, chief executive officer at Loma Linda University Medical Center.

“We are thrilled at this new opportunity to expand our services to this community,” Heinrich said.

“Combining our current strengths with the long-standing history of Loma Linda University Health and Adventist Health was the best option for the community we serve,” said Dr. Jerilynn Kaibel, San Gorgonio Memorial Hospital board chairwoman.

The hospital district would remain public, with a local public board managing district operations.

“The ACA and other market pressures have caused some health systems, hospitals and medical groups to pursue strategic partnerships,” said Dylan H. Roby, senior research scientist at the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research.

“In the L.A. area, UCLA is trying to broaden its reach into a larger part of L.A. County via purchases of medical groups and offices and partnerships with other providers as well,” Roby said.

Similar collaborative efforts are being seen in the San Francisco Bay area as UC San Francisco Medical Center is reaching out to medical organizations in the East Bay, said Jan Emerson-Shea, vice president of external affairs for the California Hospital Association.

“While the ACA itself did not create the incentive, it seems to have accelerated changes in the market,” said Roby.

“Every provider needs a plan to take advantage of the new investments made by the ACA, via insurance coverage, grants, innovation models” and other measures, Roby said.

These must be done while the providers adjust to the reimbursement changes in the law, through Medicare growth reductions and other measures, Roby said.

Emerson-Shea said that as part of the ACA, California hospitals will lose some $22 billion in Medicare funding between now and 2023.

“I think Loma Linda University Medical Center could certainly develop a hub for specialty care for the Inland Empire and create strategic alliances to broaden its reach into the more rural areas ...,” Roby said.

Advertisement

If the agreement becomes final, the LLU Health team will invest $50 million to help San Gorgonio Memorial Hospital complete a major expansion.

The Loma Linda medical center is seeking the alliance because it believes only those who create integrated health systems will thrive under the ACA, said Heinrich.

“Yes, we need a partner” for survival, said Kaibel. “They (LLU Health) bring a lot to the table. They seem to be the perfect fit as partners.”

The hospital expansion is desperately needed to keep up with the explosive population growth in the San Gorgonio Pass, she said.