The following editorial appeared recently in the Columbus Ledger-Enquirer:

At some point, and on some commonsense level, Georgia lawmakers have to get past the idea that the deciding factor in health care policy is the political necessity of publicly loathing Barack Obama.

The deciding factor ought to be the needs of millions of Georgians whose interests those lawmakers are sworn to represent. More specifically, it’s about the more than 1.5 million Georgia residents who have no health insurance.

According to a recent study by the Kaiser Family Foundation, in only three states is that number higher, and they are all more populous than Georgia. The same study shows Georgia with the third-highest number of uninsured citizens — again, behind only more highly populated Texas and Florida — who make too little to qualify for subsidies under the Affordable Care Act and too much to qualify for unexpanded Medicaid. That number, in Georgia, tops 300,000.

That “coverage gap” was on the minds of families and advocates who gathered recently in Atlanta to ask legislators to provide better mental health coverage for children and young adults. Many of the latter, anxious (and in at least one case grieving) parents told lawmakers, are in mental health crises with no access to affordable help.

It was also on the minds of local members of the state House Democratic Caucus who led a recent town meeting in Columbus, making the case for Georgia to join the 31 states that have already expanded Medicaid to insure working families who otherwise cannot afford health coverage.

It’s an economic and practical as well as a moral issue, House Minority Leader Stacey Abrams, D-Atlanta, told the Columbus audience: “We have 15 rural hospitals facing ruin if we don’t step up. We have millions of dollars we can generate for this state and thousands of jobs.”

A telling statistic from the Kaiser report: Hospitals in states that expanded Medicaid had an average decrease in uninsured patients of nearly one-third, and a 40 percent decrease in unreimbursed costs for indigent patient care. A different study, this one by Moody’s Investors Service, showed an average of 13 percent less uncollectible debt on unpaid hospital bills last year in Medicaid expansion states.

For how many struggling rural hospitals might such numbers mean the difference between survival and going under? More to the point, for how many acutely ill and injured people might they mean the difference between life and death?

Georgians’ critical need for affordable and timely access to health care is a fact, not a “talking point.” If lawmakers have a better approach than 100 percent federal coverage through 2016 and 90 percent thereafter, let’s hear it. If Georgia has a feds-free formula for saving desperately needed health care facilities and caring for the Georgians who desperately need them, let’s hear it. What we’ve gotten so far is political placebo.