Under House Bill 13-1254 the 20-year-old Longmont Community Justice Partnership (LCJP.org ), will be expanded to become the 20th Judicial District's pilot project in Boulder. Boulder will import successful innovation from Longmont. Below is a snapshot of what you can expect.

Easy to volunteer. I took the four-hour training to become a community member volunteer. My first circle or conference dealt with a young teen who had been diverted from the criminal justice system by the police. But I would learn then and over my next dozen or so circles that restorative justice in Longmont involves the entire community in turning young offenders away from a potential life of crime.

I met Henry, the facilitator, and his co-facilitator, Jim. They had done a pre-conference meeting with the offender and the victim and their parents to ensure both parties were in agreement to go forward with the non-criminal resolution of this offense — without agreement the case reverts to the criminal justice system and can result in imprisonment and fine for the offender.

The circle's ground rules. We sat in a circle of chairs facing each other: the offender and his parents, victim and parents, the referring police officer, Alan, another community volunteer, myself, Henry and Jim.

Advertisement

Henry explained no record would be kept except for notes by Jim necessary to complete a contract to repair any harm. Everyone would sign the contract and those notes would be destroyed. "This is not a trial to determine guilt or innocence," Henry said, "but a means to identify any harm done and find ways to repair it." Each of us would speak of the effects of the harm in a revealing and honest truth-telling.

There will be tears. Henry then guided the offender in discussing what he'd done, and how the offense had affected him. In my experience the young offender will usually apologize directly to the victim at this time. With coaching from Henry the offender will be encouraged to talk about any possible harm done to other members of the circle. For most young offenders their understanding of the harm done probably extends only to their parents and the victim at this point in the circle.

In turn, each of us described the impact of the offense. It is emotional, especially for all parents involved. The offender heard his parents express disappointment and loss of trust. The offender's parents saw their child facing his responsibility and agreeing to make things right. The victim expressed the hurt he experienced in his own words in a congenial setting not possible in a courtroom. The victim's parents realized their child was not only receiving an apology but also witnessing first-hand the restorative justice process used to repair harm.

Educators in blue. Alan's description of the offense and its effect on the police was a vital lesson in civics delivered with sensitivity and a view to instruct without scolding. In every circle I've attended, police officers become teachers speaking soulfully to young offenders, urging them to respect their community as good citizens. That night I learned how much the community partnership depended on an effective police force — 95 percent of referrals to Longmont's program are made by the responding officer. This involvement is inspired from the top by Mike Butler, Public Safety Director, who was instrumental in starting the program 20 years ago.

Harm to the Community. As a community member I thanked the offender for his courage to take responsibility for his action. It is my job to make sure everyone understands that offenders are valuable members of the community; locking them away in a jail solves nothing and can result in a life of repeated offenses. A well-functioning community needs all members to mature and grow into good citizens.

B

uilding a contract for repairing harms. Jim's role as co-facilitator is to record the circle's suggestions in a brainstorming session to repair harm. In that pre-conference meeting, he interviewed both offender and victim to create profiles of interests and talents of each that can be used by the circle to create a contract. Contract items must relate to the offense and be agreed to by everyone in the circle. In a few months I would get an email from the LCJP staff reporting that tonight's offender had completed his contract.

Remarkable results. From Executive Director of LCJP, Candy Campbell: "Our community restorative justice program serves over 225 offenders, 125 victims and incorporates over 3,500 volunteer hours each year...RJ in schools began four years ago and this year the student team broke 5,000 hours of volunteer service." Recidivism, the repeat offense rate, has run from 50 to 67 percent nationally and in other Colorado counties. The rate in Longmont is about 7 percent.

Aside from numbers, I have seen families come together and friendships form. Expecting retribution from authority, offenders get a second chance to make things right. Instead of a continued feeling of loss, victims experience the community's support in a healing process.

Bill Ellis is a volunteer with the Longmont Community Justice Partnership.