U.S. uninsurance rate is down yet again. Is Obamacare working?

U.S. uninsurance rate is down yet again. Is Obamacare working? Apr 11

Open enrollment is going smoothly as the Obamacare exchanges enter their third year. More than half the states have now expanded Medicaid, extending coverage to millions. Cost growth is moderating. And the rate of being uninsured has dipped to historic lows.

Is American health care finally about to be fixed?

Hardly.

Those with insurance are starting to face almost as many barriers to accessing and affording care as those without it. Premiums are rising both for employer plans and Obamacare plans, higher deductibles and co-payments are forcing patients to pay more of the cost of care themselves, and narrow networks are limiting choices of doctors and hospitals. At the same time, some drugs now cost more each year than a college education.

The health-care system confuses almost everyone who receives care. Even experts find themselves stumped by their own bills. It is increasingly difficult to protect both your health and your wallet, and more and more of us are feeling the effects.

Obamacare opponents blame the law for many of these ills, even though most of the problems were gaining steam long before Obama became president. Still, there is no question that health reform has left much business unfinished.

To help demystify the health-care morass, Philly.com's "Field Clinic" blog is expanding its scope and becoming "Health Cents." For the last three years, our panel of experts has been explaining the policy and politics that shape our health care. The blog will now add stories from you, our readers, about frustrations and roadblocks in getting care and paying for it, and will offer insights and explanations to help you understand them.

Do you have a large bill from a provider you didn't expect? A claim that was denied without explanation? A change in your insurance plan you don't understand? Do you need help sorting through data on the quality of your doctor or hospital or figuring out what your care will cost? "Health Cents" will point you toward answers.

At the same time, we will continue to offer insights on government health policy and debates in the political arena, as we have in the past. "Health Cents" experts will help you make sense of health care - from developments in Washington, Harrisburg, and City Hall to the latest research from academia to the surprise bill that just came in the mail.

Look for our posts at philly.com/healthcents.

If you have been a regular reader of the "Field Clinic," we hope you will enjoy the expanded scope of "Health Cents." If you are a newcomer to the blog, welcome. Your health and your wallet may both be the better for it.

-----

Have a health care question or frustration? Share your story »

Read more of Health Cents »

More Coverage What will it take to make sense of medical bills?

Nov 15 - 3:50 AM