Fire crews on Saturday contained two of four blazes in remote areas of the Dinosaur National Monument, while fighting new fires elsewhere in northwest Colorado.

The largest new fire, at 300 acres, is near Elk Springs on a mix of federal, state and private land. Gusty winds and difficult access frustrated crews trying to fight the fire, which was reported late Saturday afternoon, according to a news release from the Northwest Colorado Fire Management Unit. The fire’s cause has not been determined.

Firefighters’ priority is to protect Elk Springs, which is northwest of the fire, as well as nearby oil and gas facilities and major power lines.

Crews on Saturday also fought other new small fires in the region while continuing to patrol the 20,690-acre Alkali fire northwest of Craig. The northwest fire unit expects full containment by Sunday of that fire, which was reported Wednesday.

Other fires were burning Saturday within the Colorado National Monument, along the Colorado-Utah state line.

The monument’s two fully contained fires, both on the Utah side, are the 4.7-acre Island Park fire, near Rainbow Park, and the tiny Quarry fire. That one was controlled at one-tenth of an acre near an area called Orchid Draw. Both began burning Friday.

Firefighters’ main concern, though, was the Hog Canyon fire, which also started Friday and grew to 76 acres on the Yampa Plateau in Utah.

A news release said the crews fighting Hog Canyon included five smoke jumpers, three engines and a 20-person crew from Gila National Forest in New Mexico, with another crew on order from Lewis and Clark National Forest in Montana.

Humidity overnight Friday and quick response from several agencies aided all three efforts, the National Park Service says.

Crews also were monitoring a new blaze, called the Round Top Fire, which was reported Saturday. It was burning on two-tenths of an acre in steep terrain on the Colorado side.

The Park Service says none of the fires have threatened monument visitors or structures, and all services were open.

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray