LANSING, MI — Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who is visiting early primary states before deciding whether to run for president, stopped in Michigan on Tuesday and suggested it would not be his last time in the Mitten State.

"I'm traveling a lot," Kasich told a group of 15 or 20 small business owners in downtown Lansing. "And for those that like me or don't like me, you're going to see a lot of me in Michigan. I consider Michigan to be a critical state."

Kasich is considering whether to join a crowded Republican presidential field that already includes 12 candidates, including former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and businessman Donald Trump, who both made it official this week.

Kasich is considered one of the more moderate voices in the growing GOP field, but he could compete for the same center-right voters and establishment donors as Bush, who enters the race with a much larger national profile.

Asked about Bush and Trump, Kasich largely demurred, saying he's focused on introducing himself to voters and letting them draw their own conclusions. But he did indicate that he's nearing his own decision.

"We look at resources, we look at organization, and we're very disciplined in this, because we don't want to waste anyone's time," he said. "...But I will tell you that things are looking pretty darned good. We know we can't wait forever... and the decision will be coming soon."

Kasich, who was expected to meet with Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder later Tuesday, comes across as a more direct and gruff version of our own "one tough nerd."

In a 30-minute speech at the Small Business Association of Michigan headquarters, Kasich said he doesn't care about politics, approaches his job as if he were a CEO and is focused on finding problems and solving them.

Like Snyder, he's bucked the party line by expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act and has offered public support for Common Core education standards. He's not in town to seek Snyder's endorsement, Kasich told reporters, but he called him a "terrific" governor.

"I just like Rick," he said. "I think he's done a heck of a job. He doesn't pay a lot of attention to politics, and I'm looking forward to it."

Kasich has also tapped a couple of high-profile Snyder campaign strategists for his potential presidential run.

His Super PAC recently hired strategist John Weaver and ad guru Fred Davis, who worked on Snyder's gubernatorial campaigns and were reportedly part of his own possible presidential campaign, which the Ann Arbor Republican scrapped last month.

Kasich, who has now visited Michigan twice this year, was expected to speak at an Ingham County Republican Party reception on Tuesday evening.

Michigan is going to a be a critical state, Kasich said, because it will host a relatively early primary on March 8 and, along with Pennsylvania, is similar to Ohio. He came from South Carolina and is expected in New Hampshire later this week.

"He's obviously continuing to explore his options as they relate to a presidential run, and my guess is, he knows the Midwest state turnaround story, and we are one of those," said Rob Fowler, president and CEO of the Small Business Association of Michigan.

Kasich, who served in Congress and the private sector before running for governor in 2010, suggested that his experience running a state has helped him understand the needs of small business owners and job creators.

He referenced the "Common Sense Initiative," an effort focused on streamlining Ohio's business regulations to make the state more business-friendly.

"Part of it is you have to have a mechanism whereby you can look at crazy rules and regulation," he said. "There's no reason you can't scale that up. If I were to go forward and get elected, I would absolutely create something like that" at the federal level.

While Kasich has been generating some buzz in recent weeks, he'd still be considered a long shot if he entered the GOP race. He's polling outside of the top ten, according to the Real Clear Politics average.

John Truscott, co-founder of the Truscott Rossman public relations firm and a former spokesperson for Gov. John Engler, said he was impressed by Kasich's speech and his experience running a state.

"I don't have a guy yet. I"m kind of waiting to see who emerges," said Truscott. "I like him. I like what I heard. I like the plain blunt talk, but we also need somebody who can win. I just want to see more."

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.