New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie's remarks at the Republican Jewish Coalition meeting in March continue to make waves. The Associated Press

The Jewish leader who clashed with Gov. Chris Christie in Las Vegas last month may boycott another Jewish gala in New York because of Christie's presence.

Mort Klein, president of the Zionist Organization of America, tells U.S. News he's called the rabbi organizing the May 18 Jewish Values Awards Gala Dinner to express his dismay at Christie's top billing at the event.

[READ: Sheldon Adelson Ally: 'We Can't Trust Christie on Israel']

Nearly two months after his botched address in front of the Republican Jewish Coalition, the New Jersey governor is slated to be the keynote speaker at another star-packed Jewish event in the Big Apple that will honor those who have promoted Jewish values in mainstream culture.

Klein, who reprimanded Christie for referring to "occupied territories" in his remarks in front of the RJC, says the lineup of Christie and actor Sean Penn are of great concern to him.

"I usually attend. I have to think about whether I want to attend with Sean Penn and Christie there," he says, describing Christie as "a man who embraces radical Islamists."

Klein's suspicions about Christie's dedication to Israel reach far beyond his remarks about "occupied territories." In an interview Thursday, he cited Christie's full-throated defense of New Jersey Judge Sohail Mohammed – who Klein argues has affiliations with groups hostile to Israel – as well as his cozy relationship with Muslim Imam Mohammed Qatanani, who reportedly had ties to the Muslim Brotherhood.

Klein also stressed that contrary to published reports Christie never technically apologized to mega donor Sheldon Adelson for his comments, an assertion that was backed up by an Adelson aide.

"To Sheldon, all he said is, 'I misspoke,'" says Klein. "He didn’t say, 'I apologize.' He didn’t apologize."

Adelson aide Andy Abboud confirmed Klein's story in a phone interview, but conveyed that Adelson wasn't holding a grudge.

“It was a very subtle conversation. [Christie] just said, 'I misspoke, I just misspoke. I don’t know where it came from. You know how I really feel.' It was so casual you wouldn't of even known. There was no apology," says Abboud. "[Adelson] is comfortable with Chris Christie."

[ALSO: How Jeb Bush Became a Contender Again]

Klein, on the other hand, is certainly not. While Adelson may have accepted Christie's explanation, Klein said he spoke to at least a dozen others who were in attendance for the RJC speech who remain upset about the governor's slip-up.

Of all the potential 2016 aspirants, Klein said the strongest pro-Israel contender by far is former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, who received the ZOA's 2013 Defender of Israel award last fall.

"His speech was stronger than I would make. He talked about how this is the Holy Land of the Jews. Who speaks like that? No one is even close. That doesn't mean he's the best on all issues, but on Israel, he's the best," Klein says of Huckabee.

The May gala is Christie's next best opportunity to repair the damage with the Jewish community.

Other attendees that evening include Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., Gov. Rick Perry, R-Texas, and Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, D-Hawaii. Booker will accept the award for Champion of Human Spirit and Penn will be honored as Champion of Jewish Justice.

The listed hosts on the invite: Miriam and Sheldon Adelson.

Klein's presence is still to be determined.