U.S. private equity firm Warburg Pincus has shunned leverage for its acquisition of a majority stake in European asset manager and exchange traded funds-provider Source from a group of investment banks in a $300 million deal.

Source said in a statement that Warburg Pincus would become its major shareholder after agreeing a deal with stakeholders Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs Group, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co, Morgan Stanley and Nomura Holdings The banks will retain a minority stake.

Warburg Pincus did not use any debt to finance the transaction, which values Source at approximately $300 million, according to a person familiar with the matter.

The deal is Warburg Pincus’ first investment in a ETF-related business after it took steps to ramp up investment in the sector with a key hire. In December 2012, Warburg Pincus appointed the former chief executive of global ETF platform iShares, Lee Kranefuss, as an executive-in-chief to help the firm source acquisitions of companies that invest in ETFs and start-ups in the sector in Europe, Asia and Latin America. Mr. Kranefuss will join Source as an executive chairman as a result of the deal.

Warburg’s investment in Source comes as investment banks across Europe consider selling their stakes in non-core divisions due to regulatory constraints. Credit Suisse sold its European ETF business to BlackRock last year.

Private equity firms have shown increasing appetite for ETF-related businesses in recent years. London-based CVC Capital Partners attempted to buy iShares for $4.4 billion from Barclays Global Investors in 2009 but ultimately lost the auction when BlackRock took over the business as part of its acquisition of BGI from Barclays in a $15.2 billion deal.

In 2012, Gencap Ventures bought FactorShares, a leveraged ETF firm, for an undisclosed sum. Gencap, which is owned by Dallas-based Esposito Private Equity Group, uses FactorShares to offer a white-label umbrella service to other ETF firms.

Source provides equity, fixed income, commodity and alternative market exposure through ETFs and exchange traded commodities, and has over $15 billion in assets under management, according to the statement.

“The ETF industry is at an inflection point and Source offers a unique value proposition to investors,” Mr. Kranefuss said in a statement this morning. “I think that there is a tremendous opportunity for explosive growth over the next couple of years and believe that Source is well placed to become a top tier ETF provider, not only in Europe but also globally.”

Warburg Pincus’ investment will help Source consolidate in the EFT market and will support the company’s product development, a person familiar with the matter said. The deal is subject to regulatory approval.

The transaction is the latest Warburg investment in the financial services sector, as the firm scours the European market for deal opportunities. In May last year, Warburg teamed up with fellow private equity firm General Atlantic to buy a 50% stake in Banco Santander’s asset management business Santander Asset Management. In June, Warburg moved Dan Zilberman, a New York-based, financial services dealmaker, to London, with the task of building a financial services team in the continent, according to press reports.

Write to daniel.dunkley@wsj.com; follow on Twitter @MrDanDunkley

UPDATE: This story has been updated to remove a $15 billion assets under management figure for FactorShares. This had been referenced in a previous story but an up-to-date figure was not available on the company’s website.