CINCINNATI - It’s been a long day at work, and you’re eager to see your children. But you have dinner to prepare, homework to help with and household chores still to do.

Not much time left for yourself. A prominent local physician, though, is urging African-American women to be proactive and take better care of their own health.

“Many African-American women tend to be the head of their families, like myself,” says Dr. Nita Walker, vice president of primary care at UC Health. “And it’s very important for us to ensure that we take good care of ourselves so that we can take good care of the others in our families.”

Among the top health issues facing African-American women in her practice are diabetes and hypertension.

WATCH: Dr. Walker shares insights into the health issues facing African-American women, in the video player

Walker said one in four African-American women will develop diabetes during her lifetime. Diabetes elevates blood sugar levels in the body. Over time, diabetes can damage a person’s kidneys, heart, nerves, eyes and feet.

“Diabetes is a very important issue for African-American women,” Walker said, “because many women will develop complications related to diabetes that affect their long-term health.”

According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, African-American women have high rates of two serious diabetes complications: kidney failure and poor blood circulation that can require the amputation of a toe or foot.

“Diabetes affects African-American women because of genetics and family history, but also because of lifestyle related issues that include diet and exercise,” says Walker.

About twice as many African-American women — 45.7 percent — will develop hypertension, or high blood pressure, during their lifetimes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The CDC calls hypertension a silent killer because there are often no warning signs or symptoms, but the higher pressure in blood vessels increases the risk for heart disease and stroke.