ROGERS — Mercy Northwest Arkansas leaders were joined by Gov. Asa Hutchinson today as they announced plans to invest $247 million on capital projects and equipment over the next five years.

Expansion plans include a new patient tower that will add more than 100 beds to the hospital and new clinics in Benton and north Washington counties.

Mercy leaders expect the expansion to add more than 1,000 jobs over the next five years.

“Our hospital and clinics have been serving the community at a very high capacity,” Eric Pianalto, Mercy Hospital president said in a news release. “To ensure we carry out our mission and continue to meet the needs of Northwest Arkansas, we developed this $247 million community presence plan that will allow us to serve our patients into the future by providing additional access to quality care and advancing the region as a health care destination.”

The plans also call for creation of a University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences community internal medicine residency program in partnership with the Veterans Health Care System of the Ozarks in Fayetteville. The program will provide training to eight doctors the first year, growing to 24 doctors in three years.

Other specialty care areas benefiting from the capital investment include the heart and vascular center and women’s and children’s services.

“Having more clinics and recruiting new doctors and advanced practitioners to Mercy will allow our patients to get care close to home,” Dr. Steve Goss, president of Mercy Clinic, stated in the release. “Our intent is that these expansions will positively impact the health and wellness of the community.”

Mercy already has several area projects underway, including a hybrid cardiac catheterization lab that provides technology for advanced heart procedures not currently being performed in the region; an interim renovation of the Level IIIA Neonatal Intensive Care Unit; renovation of the seventh floor to add 24 inpatient beds; and a 500-space parking lot expansion.