Hospitals have been holding a lot more meet-and-greets for new hires this year, and it's unclear when those might slow down.Hospitals and health systems added 15,900 jobs in August, according to preliminary seasonally adjusted figures from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, appropriately released before the Labor Day weekend. Hospitals created more than 100,000 jobs in the first eight months of this year alone.The 15,900 people added to hospital payrolls last month was more than most other industry sectors. For example, it was more than double the net job gains from the entire transportation and warehousing industry.The growth comes despite industry predictions from earlier this year that hospitals would miss out on the hiring spree in healthcare. However, admissions have increased at many health systems this year, which appear to have spurred human resource departments to scale up staffing.

Milwaukee-based Froedtert Health said admissions were up 5.5% in the most recent fiscal year, ended June 30. Inpatient volumes in the first half of 2015 increased 4.3% at UnityPoint Health , based in Iowa. Hospitalizations at the Cleveland Clinic were up 2.5% in the most recent quarter.Moody's Investors Service has stable outlooks for both not-for-profit and for-profit hospitals , due in part to higher admissions that have resulted from the Affordable Care Act's insurance expansion.Hospitals are not only increasing staff sizes; they are also boosting the salaries of many low-wage workers because of the tightening labor market. St. Louis-based Ascension Health set a systemwide minimum wage of $11 an hour, effective July 5. Geisinger Health System, based in Danville, Pa., more recently raised the wages of all its employees to $10 an hour.Employment across the entire healthcare industry jumped by 40,500 jobs, an 8% increase from the number of healthcare jobs added in July. Physician offices, outpatient centers and other ambulatory sites created 21,100 of those jobs. Payrolls at nursing and residential-care facilities grew by 3,500.The entire U.S. economy added 173,000 jobs in August, and the total unemployment rate dropped to 5.1%—the lowest figure since April 2008.