Willard Ashton started his tourist business by letting campers onto his ranch, located in Horseshoe Park immediately west of U.S. 34 where the highway makes its sweeping turn across the park. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park / Hand-colored by Cheryl Pennington )

As a satellite to Horseshoe Inn, Willard Ashton operated this small fishing lodge at Lawn Lake. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

Willard Ashton homesteaded in Little Horseshoe Park during the 1890s, and in 1908, he constructed Horseshoe Inn next to his ranch house in Horseshoe Park.

The inn was located west of the parking lot in Horseshoe Park where the road swings around for its climb to Deer Ridge Junction.

The rustic-style inn had a large granite fireplace and veranda. It could accommodate up to 50 guests, and in addition, there were four cabins and a dozen tent cottages. Outbuildings included a barn and livery.

Later, a three-story annex was added to the inn making it a massive structure.

After Ashton built up his business, he sold it to a couple of Fort Collins car dealers in 1915 just as Rocky Mountain National Park was established. It operated until 1931 and became the first large in-holding to be purchased by the Park Service.

Across a pond formed by the Fall River, the massive Horseshoe Inn stands along with several cabins off to the right. (Bobbie Heisterkamp postcard collection)

During the winter of 1931-32, the structures were burned and the land cleared. Today, a level area of disturbed earth marks the site of the inn along with the original Fall River Road grade.

On his Little Horseshoe Park homestead property over a mile from the inn, Ashton constructed a home and a large garage with sleeping quarters in the loft.

The garage remains standing along with a root cellar. It is accessible using a trail from Horseshoe Park or walking down the access road below Deer Ridge Junction.

There were also several cabins on the site.

Ashton sold his homestead to the Park Service in 1933 with the right to stay on the land for the rest of his life. However, in 1956 upon the death of his wife, he relinquished this right.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.