Welcome to Clout Street: Morning Spin, our weekday feature to catch you up with what's going on in government and politics from Chicago to Springfield.

Topspin

It's Monday, Oct. 19, and it is generally true that you're not in trouble in a playoff series until you lose a home game, right?

Mayor Rahm Emanuel has tucked a significant change in how the City Council votes on property tax hikes into the revenue ordinance for next year’s budget that a panel of aldermen will consider Monday.

Under current city law dating to 1993, the City Council cannot increase the overall property tax levy by more than 5 percent or the rate of inflation, whichever is lower, without a separate vote to override a rule to protect taxpayers. That’s designed to make it more politically difficult to jack up property taxes.

But Emanuel wants to rewrite the law to exempt from that calculation property tax increases dedicated to pension funding.

All of the revenue from Emanuel’s proposed $543 million property tax increase over the next four years would go into the police and fire pension funds, so it would not be subject to the limitation if the council approves the change before voting on the tax hike. In essence, aldermen would have to take only one politically unpalatable vote instead of two.

Mayor to announce $250K gun buyback fund Mayor Rahm Emanuel was joining religious and community leaders at a West Side church Monday afternoon to promote a new gun buyback effort. Oct. 19, 2015. (CBS Chicago) Mayor Rahm Emanuel was joining religious and community leaders at a West Side church Monday afternoon to promote a new gun buyback effort. Oct. 19, 2015. (CBS Chicago) See more videos

Already exempt from the limitation is property tax money that goes to the library, although the amount of taxes collected for that purpose has remained steady for years.

Excluding the library, Emanuel’s property tax hike would increase the overall amount of property taxes collected by 73 percent. That, however, doesn’t mean overall taxes would go up by that much. The city accounts for only about a fifth of each tax bill, so the overall increase in each of those bills would be about 12 percent.

That doesn’t include the $45 million Emanuel wants aldermen to approve for Chicago Public Schools for construction projects, which would add another percentage point.

The breadth of Emanuel’s record-setting property tax hike proposal can be seen on the agenda for Monday morning’s meeting of the City Council Finance Committee.

It includes four public hearings, one for each of the property tax increases Emanuel has proposed in the coming years to start restoring financial health to the underfunded police and fire pension systems.

Despite the magnitude of the increases — far and away the largest in modern Chicago history — few fireworks are expected at the hearings. Typically, these unadvertised annual affairs are taken care of in a few minutes without public protest.

Later Monday, the Budget Committee meets to talk about the mayor’s overall $7.8 billion budget proposal for 2016. That’s where aldermen and the mayor could offer any changes to the budget plan.

In addition to the nitty-gritty details of the ordinances behind the budget, aldermen are sure to talk about the property tax and the $9.50-per-month fee that Emanuel proposes to charge each single-family home, duplex and four-flat for garbage pickup. (Hal Dardick)

What's on tap

*Mayor Emanuel plans to announce a $250,000 city gun buyback program, taking a page out of predecessor Richard M. Daley's playbook. The change, according to the mayor's office, is that neighborhood organizations can hold the events and promote them instead of the city doing its own event. Emanuel also will speak at the U.S. Holocaust Memorial lunch at a downtown hotel and at a gun violence prevention political action committee event.

*Gov. Bruce Rauner is scheduled to attend the Holocaust Memorial lunch.

*Illinois Republican Chairman Tim Schneider is the speaker at Monday’s City Club luncheon. Schneider took over the party chairmanship shortly after Rauner won the GOP nomination last year. Schneider has been a reliable surrogate for Rauner’s message, and the state Republican Party is heavily dependent upon the governor’s wealth. Schneider also is in his third term as a Cook County Board commissioner and may have some things to say about the budget recently proposed by Democratic Board President Toni Preckwinkle. (Rick Pearson)

From the notebook

*Brown's backing: With news surfacing last week that Cook County Circuit Court Clerk Dorothy Brown is under the scrutiny of federal law enforcement, some Democratic Party leaders were raising questions about her ability to prevail in the March 15 primary.

Ald. Ricardo Munoz, 22nd, who lost to Brown in the 2012 primary, said people began asking him to run again after the news surfaced, but he’s not interested. Ald. Walter Burnett, 27th, said he’s open to the idea of running but doesn’t think “all the stars have lined up” and doesn’t “like to kick anyone while they are down.”

When Brown sought and won the party endorsement in August, some committeemen asked her if she was under investigation and she said no, Democratic Chairman Joe Berrios said Friday.

But Brown’s defense attorney confirmed last week that the FBI went to her home recently and seized her cellphone as part of an ongoing investigation into a 2011 land deal involving a longtime campaign contributor that netted tens of thousands of dollars for Brown and her husband.

Berrios, however, said there are no immediate plans to reconsider the endorsement in light of last week’s revelation.

“Unless someone requests a full meeting not to endorse Dorothy Brown, it’s not my intention to call one,” Berrios said. “As of right now, as you and I are talking, there’s nothing on the horizon.”

Brown in recent months has been kind to the Democratic Party that endorsed her. Last month her campaign fund transferred $25,000 to the county Democratic fund.

That, and other expenses, left her with about $37,000 on hand, to $36,000 for challenger Jacob Meister. (Hal Dardick)