Nearly 30 percent of medical professionals are unsatisfied with their organization's communication technology, according to a recent Harris Poll survey.

Only about a third of health care providers use mobile and remote technologies in their work, leaving many struggling to coordinate care among themselves and their patients, a new survey finds.

Clinicians report that they feel hindered by old or underused technologies, wasted exchanges and concerns about privacy and security. Among respondents, 69 percent reported that patient care is often delayed while waiting for important medical records.

Despite this, nearly all doctors say they do value the effect that improved communication could have on managing population health and say strong collaboration can result in reduced readmissions.

[RELATED: Lack of Required Hospital Reporting Increases Superbug Danger]

The survey – which used information from 955 doctors, nurses, case managers and health care administrators – was conducted online by Harris Poll and commissioned by PerfectServe, a medical communications platform.

Results showed frustration within the system: Nearly 3 in 10 medical professionals say they are not satisfied with the technology that their organization uses for communicating. Of those who are dissatisfied, 68 report it is because different care members use different technologies and that not all members have access to the same technology.

Summary of dissatisfaction with clinical communications

"I’m not surprised that the medical community finds communicating challenging," says Dr. Jennifer DeBruler, medical director of Advocate Health Care’s Contact Center. "It’s hard to communicate when you cross out of your own health system."

Summary of agree – somewhat, strongly

More than half of clinicians – 52 percent – admit they don't always know the correct care team member that they should contact in a particular situation. Among doctors, 71 percent reported that they have wasted time trying to communicate with the broader care team, and nearly half report that other members of the medical team are contacting them when they're not caring for the patient in question.

If a patient's record isn't in the same system as the one used in the facility where he or she is being treated, there can sometimes be a wait in the emergency room while medical professionals wait for answers, DeBruler says, adding that it can take a while to receiving imaging results, for instance. "The process is very slow and things can get missed because you’re not able to get the information right at your fingertips to deal with the situation," she says.



[SPECIAL REPORT: Healthcare of Tomorrow]

Terry Edwards, the founder, president and CEO of PerfectServe, points out that when it takes longer to deliver needed care, there is a bigger chance that something negative could occur. For example, a stroke patient in the emergency room has a 30-minute window in which an IV treatment, tPA, can be administered to arrest symptoms. Many care members are involved in delivering care, Edwards says, and "that's where we see the errors [caused by inefficient technology]."

Through President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act, various models of health care delivery are being explored to lower health care spending. Care collaboration is getting more attention as the country moves toward reimbursing health care based on quality rather than quantity, Edwards says.

Electronic health records, which also have faced a major push by the federal government, are used 12 percent of the time, both to find out information to questions about the patient or to communicate with another doctor.

[READ: Cleveland Clinic, Other Health Systems Use Analytics to Boost Patient Satisfaction]

When it comes to communicating, traditional phone calls are used most often – by 83 percent of respondents – and online patient portals are used by 74 percent of respondents.

Remote and mobile technologies still lag way behind. They include telemedicine, remote coordination and video conferencing.

Summary of currently used technologies

Among respondents, about 60 percent believe that HIPAA regulations, government rules put in place to protect the security and privacy of medical records, get in the way of communicating and collaborating with different medical professionals. "The bar is pretty high on how protective health information is transmitted," Edwards says.

DeBruler says part of getting better use from technology is getting all providers as well as patients on board. "We have a generation of people who don't have computers or haven't embraced the technology," she says.

Through becoming more involved in their care, she says, patients can take better care of themselves.