Buy Photo (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Nobody in Iowa's 4th Congressional District has any problems confusing the policies advocated by U.S. Rep. Steve King with those proposed by Democratic challenger Jim Mowrer on the campaign trail this fall.

King, 65, is a Republican firebrand from Kiron who has been labeled one of the most partisan U.S. House members. He has sharp differences with Mowrer, 28, an Iraq war veteran and former Pentagon administrator from Boone.

King wants to repeal President Obama's Affordable Care Act, he's against legalized abortion and same-sex marriage, and he's opposed to raising the minimum wage. He supports a so-called "flat tax" to replace the current tax system with a national consumption tax, and he favors abolishing the Internal Revenue Service.

COMPARE CANDIDATES: See whose views align with yours

Mowrer suggests some fixes to Obamacare, but he wouldn't repeal it. He backs abortion rights and won't endorse federal action to overturn same-sex marriage in Iowa. He supports an increase in the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour, and favors a "progressive" federal tax system to close tax loopholes.

The 4th District covers 39 counties in northwest and north-central Iowa, including Ames, Fort Dodge, Mason City and Sioux City.

King remarks that there is a growing sense of dysfunction in the federal government, and he cites President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act as an example. Another is an Internal Revenue Service controversy involving the alleged targeting of conservative groups, he added.

"There is piece after piece of this that looks like government is being used as a tool to do something other than serve Americans," King said. "That growing sense of dysfunctionality I think has now penetrated into our culture and our society, and it's going to be a hard thing to put back together."

Mower says there's plenty of blame to spread around for partisan gridlock in the nation's capital, and he contends King is part of the problem.

"I think that across the board in Washington the job is not getting done. Everyone has to take responsibility. I think the Congress is to blame. The president is to blame," Mowrer says

But Mowrer particularly singles out tea party activists, who consider King a hero for refusing to compromise with Democrats, as contributing to political chaos in Washington.

"The tea party has made it more difficult. That is why we cannot keep sending back the same failed tea party representatives like my opponent and get the job done," Mowrer says.

King isn't making any apologies.

The incumbent congressman says he has been asked about what policies of President Obama he agrees with, and his response is, "What does he agree with me on? We have a solid base here in the state of Iowa. So it would be causing more problems to go along to get along than it is to stand on the principles that need to prevail in the end."

Christopher Larimer, a political scientist at the University of Northern Iowa, says he suspects economic issues will dominate the 4th District race, such as the federal budget and whether the national economy is on the right track. He also believes King remains a favorite to win reelection, noting the incumbent congressman staved off a strong challenge two years ago by Democrat Christie Vilsack in a presidential election year which saw a high voter turnout.

Larimer says he doesn't think King's penchant for making controversial comments will hurt him in the 4th District, which is 38 percent registered Republicans, 26 percent registered Democrats, and 37 percent no party or other voters. King has even drawn criticism from the top ranks of his own party for his remarks. Last year House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, publicly scolded King for "ignorant" and "wrong" statements he made that compared immigrants hoping to win U.S. legal status under the DREAM Act with drug runners.

"He has made controversial comments for a number of years, and if they haven't hurt him yet I am not sure they will hurt him in a mid-term election," Larimer said.

Comparing on other issues:

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT:

King favors a complete repeal of the Affordable Care Act, saying it's a violation of the Constitution's origination clause. He adds that after a botched implementation of the program, millions of Americans have realized they can't keep their insurance or their doctors as promised by Obama. Mowrer says the health care law has a lot of issues that must be addressed, including a tax that punishes some middle class families who have health insurance through their employer. But Mowrer contends that those who seek to repeal the health care law simply want to put insurance companies back in charge of an individual's health care decisions.

ABORTION

King says he believes life begins at conception and human life is sacred. Mowrer says health care decisions, including abortion, are a mattter between a woman and her doctor.

SAME-SEX MARRIAGE

King noted that he wrote Iowa's Defense of Marriage law, which says marriage is between one man and one woman, and he still supports that position. He objects to "activist judges" who have ruled in favor of gay marriage. But if state legislatures want to write acceptance of same-sex marriage into law, he says he accepts that as the will of the people, even though he might try to change it down the road. Mowrer says would not support federal action to overturn a 2009 Iowa Supreme Court decision that legalized same-sex marriage.

MINIMUM WAGE

King is against raising the federal minimum wage, saying while there may be a short-term benefit for some, an increase would without question lead to the loss of jobs. Mowrer supports raising the minimum wage to $10.10 per hour. When a full-time employee qualifies for help through government programs, taxpayers are effectively subsidizing a company that underpays its employees, Mowrer says.

TAXATION

King wants to abolish the Internal Revenue Service and eliminate federal income taxes. He would replace the income tax with a "Fair Tax" that would be a sales tax on all new goods and services sold in the U.S. Mowrer endorses the Buffet Rule, which would marginally increase taxes on those making more than $1 million per year by treating capital gains as income. He says King's idea of a national sales tax would be regressive for Americans, contending it would stifle consumer spending and further increase the gap between the wealthy and blue-collar Americans.

CLIMATE CHANGE

King says climate scientists have proven to be inaccurate and in some cases dishonest, so it's clear there is little grasp on what the future holds for the climate. He adds that some of the initiatives offered by environmental activists would hurt the economy and impose crushing taxes on Americans to combat something with little scientific evidence that has proven to be out of our control. Mowrer says the overwhelming consensus of the scientific community points to climate change being real and man-made action contributes in a significant way to its acceleration. Iowa has the most to lose by doing nothing and the most to gain by addressing climate change, he adds.

Steve King

Age: 65.

Grew up: Storm Lake, Goodell and Denison.

Current home: Rural Kiron.

Education: Attended Northwest Missouri State University, studying math and science.

Political experience: Elected to the Iowa Senate in 1996 and Congress in 2002.

Family: Wife Marilyn; sons Dave, Mick and Jeff.

Religious affiliation: Roman Catholic.

Campaign website: www.steveking.com.

Jim Mowrer

Age: 28.

Date of birth: April 15, 1986.

Place of birth: Boone.

Grew up: Boone.

Current home: Boone.

Education: Graduate of Boone High School; American Military University, bachelor's degree; George Mason University, master's degree.

Political experience: None.

Family: Wife Chelsey; sons Carter, 5, and Jack, 3.

Religious affiliation: Member of the First Presbyterian Church in Boone.

Campaign website: www.jimforiowa.com.

Twitter handle: @jimmowrer.

Facebook page: www.facebook.com/MowrerforIowa.

IPTV debate planned for Thursday

IN STORM LAKE: Iowa Public Television has scheduled a debate for 7 p.m. Thursday between U.S. Rep. Steve King, R-Kiron, and his challenger, Jim Mowrer, a Democrat from Boone. The event is planned before a live audience at Buena Vista University in Storm Lake.

KING THREATENS PULLOUT: The Ames Tribune reported last week that King was threatening to pull out of the debate in a dispute over a television ad used by Mowrer's campaign that discusses benefits enjoyed by the GOP congressman. King's campaign said the ad is false. Mowrer's campaign spokesman contended King's campaign was misquoting the ad to give him an excuse to drop out of his only debate with his Democratic opponent. As of late last week, IPTV officials said the debate had not been canceled.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1wcZL4b