The Drive to Merge, Acquire, or Partner

The individual reasons are varied, as are the models, but healthcare leaders continue to look beyond their own organizations to survive and thrive.

While healthcare reform and the transition to delivering value-based care are pushing merger, acquisition, and partnership (MAP) activity to ever-higher levels, these are not the only factors responsible for driving this growing phenomenon. In fact, increasing momentum for MAP activity is noteworthy both for the range of influences playing a role in its acceleration, as well as the absence of mitigating factors slowing its proliferation.

According to the 2016 HealthLeaders Media Mergers, Acquisitions, and Partnerships Survey, for example, the top financial objective for MAP activity is to increase market share within our geography (70%). However, there is ample support for a range of objectives and the remainder of the top five—improve financial stability (60%), improve operational cost efficiencies (58%), improve position for payer negotiations (57%), and expand geographic coverage (57%)—all have response levels above 50%, indicating that no single objective is responsible for driving MAP activity.

Likewise, the top five care delivery objectives follow a similar pattern: to improve position for population health management (70%) receives the highest response, followed by improve position for care delivery efficiencies (63%), improve clinical integration (61%), gain care delivery cost efficiencies through scale (54%), and expand into new care delivery areas (51%). Note, however, that a reform-related care delivery objective occupies the top spot, so its influence cannot be understated.

"I would say that in every conversation that I have about this, somebody asks me how much did the Affordable Care Act have to do with driving the decisions that this particular group of people made, that this is all in response to healthcare reform and the implications that that poses for people. My observation is that it's possible to make an argument or connect a lot of things back to that, but in our case and in others that I'm hearing, it's not necessarily any one of the elements, but it's all of them together," says Greg Devine, former senior vice president of provider strategies at ThedaCare, an Appleton, Wisconsin–based nonprofit health system, and current president and CEO at AboutHealth, a Wisconsin-based clinically integrated network.

MAP activity levels

Without question, survey respondents are bullish on the prospects for higher levels of MAP activity. Seventy-five percent of respondents say they will either be exploring potential deals or completing deals that are underway in the next 12–18 months, and only one in four respondents (25%) say they have no MAP plans. Further, nearly two-thirds of respondents (63%) say that their organization's MAP activity will increase within the next three years, and only 3% say it will decrease. Thirty-three percent say it will stay the same.

Another barometer of MAP activity is the total dollar value of the mergers and acquisitions that respondents say their organizations will be exploring over the next three years. While this year's survey results are comparable to last year's, there is a small shift to a higher total dollar spend on mergers and acquisitions. The $50 million–$99.9 million range is up three points to 17%, and $100 million–$499.9 million is up five points to 21% compared with last year (for a combined eight-point increase), while the lower $10 million–$49.9 million range is down nine points to 23%.

Interestingly, respondents indicate that it is not only total MAP spend that is increasing, but also the size of the deals being pursued. Nearly half of respondents (49%) say that they expect the dollar value of the mergers and acquisitions their organization will be pursuing within the next three years will increase, and only 5% say the value will go down. Sixteen percent say it will remain even.

Factors driving MAP activity

As mentioned earlier, the reasons behind the high rate of MAP activity range from traditional considerations such as the need for increased market share, improved scale, and increased financial stability, which are more tactical in nature, to more strategic and far-reaching factors such as anticipating the impact of the Affordable Care Act and the transition to value-based care.