(TRUNEWS) The House Energy and Commerce Committee has accused a top official in the Obama Administration of misleading Congress about Obamacare.

In December, Andy Slavitt the acting administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services was questioned about how state-based exchanges under Obamacare spent federal grant money.

According to the Washington Free Beacon, Slavitt testified that the exchanges returned over $200 million in grant money to the feds.

“Information and documents SMS recently provided to the committee fail to corroborate Mr. Slavitt’s testimony and raise significant questions regarding the truthfulness of his statements,” the report said.

The agency sent in documents requested by the committee and found the agency had only recovered $21.5 million from the state exchanges. Slavitt is accused of misrepresenting the amount of money and implying the funds were returned because of improper spending by states.

“CMS did not recover any of the funds due to improper spending,” the report states. “Instead of recouping funds from the exchanges, CMS simply ‘de-obligated’ these funds because the time for the grant had expired or the funds were no longer needed.”

Some Republicans want the administration to recoup some of the money from the exchanges that were poorly run. Maryland gave back $32.5 million, along with its web contractor, Nordian, according to the Washington Times. The website crashed within minutes of its launch and experienced multiple problems afterward.

Earlier this week three of President Obama’s former speechwriters joked on the Charlie Rose Show about including in his speech the line about people being able to keep their healthcare.

“If you like your healthcare plan, you can keep your health care plan,” Obama said in a speech before The Affordable Health Act was implemented.

But, most policies were canceled due to the regulations.

This comes as insurers in some states are asking regulators for premium increases. In Virginia, Carefirst BlueCross BlueShield wants a 25 percent premium increase. Providence Health in Oregon is asking for almost 30 percent.

Massive hikes are expected just a week before the November election, as reported by Breitbart. The cost of tax credits to subsidize insurers will go up also, and is expected to hit $105 billion by 2025.