What will happen with Obamacare premiums in Ohio in coming years? Give us your forecast in the comments.

Ohioans who switched Obamacare plans this year will save an average of $648, according to a new federal report that seeks to emphasize the value of shopping for plans on healthcare.gov.

The report by the Health and Human Services Department indicates that 49,462 Ohioans have switched plans during the open enrollment period and will save an average of $54 on their monthly premiums.

"People coming to the marketplace for coverage are active, engaged, and shopping to save money," HHS Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said in a press release that accompanied the report.

While it offered some good news for consumers, the report also indicated something else about Obamacare in Ohio: It is still more expensive to buy plans here than almost anywhere else in the country.

The average premium for people who switched plans in Ohio is $192 after tax credits, according to the HHS report. That's fourth highest among the 38 states that use healthcare.gov, behind only New Hampshire ($207), West Virginia ($201), and New Jersey ($200).

Several factors likely contribute to Ohio's higher premium costs, but one of the culprits is the consolidation of larger health care providers whose dominance gives them leverage over insurers, according to J.B, Silvers, a professor of health care finance at Case Western Reserve University.

"Providers here are generally able to negotiate pretty good rates with insurance companies, and that gets passed off to consumers," Silvers said.

In Northeast Ohio, the Cleveland Clinic, University Hospitals and MetroHealth have all expanded rapidly in recent years, acquiring smaller community hospitals and physicians' practices. So far, it remains to be seen whether their promises to be more efficient in delivering care will result in savings for consumers.

Meanwhile, in the market for Obamacare plans, insurers are still struggling to create products that are priced attractively to consumers but don't result in large financial losses for their companies.

During a health care forum moderated by The Plain Dealer last week, an executive with Medical Mutual said her company is not making money on its Obamacare business.

The executive, Heather Thiltgen, a senior vice president of individual and government programs, said the company is trying to strike a balance between the increased costs embedded in the law (such as covering people with pre-existing conditions) and offering premiums that are affordable to consumers.

"We had to look at how we could save consumers money and protect the bottom line by driving behavior" that is more cost-conscious, she said. For example, she noted, the company is restricting coverage for non-emergency use of hospital emergency rooms, a practice that typically adds hundreds of dollars to patients' bills.

As insurers continue tweaking their plans, it will become even more important for consumers to revisit the federal marketplace to shop for plans. This year, according to the HHS report, about 60 percent of re-enrollees nationally switched plans, achieving an average savings of $43 a month on their premiums.

Silvers, the Case Western professor, said the very act of shopping for health insurance is still a "new phenomenon" for many consumers who are used to having very few options.

Now, the options are aplenty: plans with narrow and broad networks of doctors, plans with high and low deductibles, and plans with different costs for drug coverage, primary care visits, and other services.

In addition to all those variables, premiums are bound to change as insurers gather more information about costs and utilization by consumers, and adjust their rates accordingly.

"You're going to continue to see movement in the prices going up and down, which means the consumers, the people on the other side of the transaction, have got to do some shopping," Silvers said.