"This is a cynical game by the governor to take care of developers while blaming an activist court." Jeff Tittel



The headlines said that Chris Christie had been handed a historic setback when the state Supreme Court decided the other day to take back control of the state's affordable-housing apparatus.

Jeff Tittel has a different view.

"I think this is a cynical game by the governor to take care of developers while blaming an activist court for selling out to developers and lawyers," the Sierra Club spokesman told me.

Former Gov. Tom Kean offered essentially the same analysis - minus the dark motives.

"I understand the box they've gotten themselves into because of their original decisions," said Kean of the justices. "And Christie's smart enough to smile."

What he's likely smiling about is that he beat the judges at their own game. And that game is now officially back to Square One.

Or should I say "Back to the Future?" That movie came out the same year that Kean signed into law the Affordable Housing Act, the law that set up the state Council On Affordable Housing.

At the time, Kean recalls, the court had made such a mess of affordable-housing law that he and the Legislature decided they had to step in and straighten things out.

The mess was the direct result of the high court's decisions in the Mount Laurel affordable housing case. The case stemmed from a lawsuit started by a civil rights group on behalf of some black residents of the Burlington County town of Mount Laurel. They wanted to build multifamily housing in what was then a relatively rural area in a town with quarter-acre zoning.

The court could have decided the case on a property-rights basis - it's your property and you can do what you want with it. But instead the justices issued a couple of decisions filled with high-minded rhetoric but short on concrete rules for deciding which developments deserved approval.

"That particular court was into those big social pronouncements," Kean recalled.

It was indeed. And that's where those developers and lawyers mentioned by Tittel come in. Before Kean bailed the court out, every minor zoning dispute was a potential Supreme Court case. The justices had to set up special "Mount Laurel courts" to deal with the backlog as builders and developers rushed to carve up the suburbs.

After 1985, it was the executive branch that took over the task, with COAH handling the heavy lifting for the court.

But no good deed goes unpunished, at least not where the court is concerned. The court kept issuing decision after decision calling for farms and forests to be paved over in the name of affordable housing.

My favorite was a 2002 decision by the court to approve a 1,165-unit development called "The Estates at Princeton" (see that column below, reprinted for your reading pleasure) on one of the few farms remaining in West Windsor Township.

"It was sold as something for poor people, but it was never anything for poor people," Kean said of the Mount Laurel decisions. "Poor people don't live in these little towns in the suburbs that are the victims of this."

Many Democrats did, however. When he was mayor of Woodbridge, Jim McGreevey fought to keep COAH projects out of his town. Once safely in the Statehouse, McGreevey became a champion of COAH.

So was his successor, Jon Corzine. But most of the developments created the same "suburban sprawl" bemoaned by environmentalists and high property taxes hated by homeowners.

By 2009 Christie could expect applause and cheers every time he repeated his promise to "gut COAH" on the campaign trail. Once in office, Christie did just that. The court ordered the administration to revive COAH . But Christie dug in his heels on issuing yet another set of the elaborate regulations spewed out by the bureaucrats every five years or so.

As of Tuesday, none of this is Christie's problem anymore.

"All civil actions authorized herein shall be directed to the Mount Laurel-designated judges assigned in the vicinages," the court ordered.

That's exactly the system the justices had set up when Kean tried to help them out in the 1980s. And it soon led to backups as high as 71 cases in just one court.

Jeff Surenian is a land-use lawyer from Ocean County who represented one town in this case. In the early 1980s, he was a clerk for Superior Court Judge Eugene Serpentelli, a highly respected judge who did his best to handle the backlog that developed then.

"We're really headed now into an age there's going to be a lot of litigation," Surenian said. "I don't know if the Supreme Court appreciated how difficult this will be for a trial judge to figure this out with any kind of speed."

Kean agreed.

"The courts don't have the staff and the planners to do this," he said. "Somehow we should get it out of the courts and back in the arena of common sense."

Yes, we should. But if this was, as Tittel charges, a "cynical game by the governor," then he can officially be declared the winner.

ADD: Over the years I've written numerous columns debunking the COAH fantasy, Here's one from 2002 that pretty much captures it all. It was headlined "Housing Dense, Judges Denser."



If you've been following the recent decisions on land use by judges around New Jersey, you may be a bit confused. Don't worry. You're not half as confused as they are.

So I will now explain the matter in a question-and-answer format so simple that even a New Jersey Supreme Court justice could understand it.

Q. What is the central issue in all these cases?

A. The central issue is so-called "exclusionary zoning." Affordable-housing advocates say that many towns require lot sizes so big that poor and middle-income people can't afford to buy new houses there.

Q. So what did the courts do that created all this fuss?

A. One court dealt with the question of whether a town could enforce a zoning scheme that required a huge 10-acre lot for every house.



Q. Wow! That's a lot of land. I guess that one was thrown out on the grounds of exclusionary zoning, right?

A. Wrong. A judge in Hunterdon County ruled that that zoning scheme was perfectly fine for the township of East Amwell. The township wants to protect its farmland.

Q. So which case involved the exclusionary zoning?

A.That was the West Windsor case. A developer went before the court seeking permission to build 1,165 units on 300 acres. The New Jersey Supreme Court said that was fine.



Q. Wait a minute. That's about 40 times as many houses per acre, right?

A. Yup. And the court ordered the town to let the developer build it.



Q.I guess these towns must be in different parts of the state, right?



A. Actually, they're just 12 miles apart as the crow flies. But he better fly fast if he wants to land on the West Windsor site. A subdivision called "The Estates at Princeton" will be built there soon.

Q. The Estates at Princeton? That doesn't sound affordable.

A. Most of it won't be. All but a few of the units will be sold to high-income people. The rest will be sold to middle-class people. None will be cheap enough for actual poor people.



Q.What's there now?

A. Farmland. I drove by it the other day. There were rabbits and hawks and stuff. Across the street is a working farm.

Q. I don't get it. The courts say farmland in one town has to be jammed with housing while farmland in a neighboring town can be preserved. Why pick on West Windsor?

A. Because it has zoned for a lot of new businesses.

Q. Why did it do that?

A. Because it needs new ratables to reduce the high property taxes that pay for its schools.

Q.Why are the property taxes so high?

A. Because the state gives the township of West Windsor almost no school aid - less than 8 percent of the cost of education.

Q. Why is so little state aid being offered to towns like West Windsor?

A. Because of state Supreme Court decisions ordering that a disproportionate share of that aid be given to urban schools.

Q. So how is West Windsor supposed to keep school taxes down?

A. Don't ask me. Ask the court.

Q. How did this all get started?



A. In 1975 the state Supreme Court issued the first of its landmark Mount Laurel rulings on affordable housing. The court created a new right.

Q. What was that right?

A. I've heard it described by housing activists as the right of any person in New Jersey to buy a house in any town at an affordable price.

Q. Sounds good to me. I'll take one out in the horse country and one down the Shore.

A. That's the problem. So will everyone else. Soon the state will be pavement from High Point to Cape May.

Q. And then the process would stop?

A. Nope. That's just the development phase. It would be followed by what the state calls "redevelopment."

Q. What's that?



A. Condos to the sky. Every six years, every town gets a new affordable-housing quota. The process never ends.

Q. Is there a way out of this?

A. Yes. Some people have proposed putting a referendum on the ballot asking the people of New Jersey if they want to reverse the Mount Laurel decisions and restore zoning power to the towns.

Q.Who are those people?

A. Bret Schundler, for one. During the campaign last year, the Republican candidate argued that the Mount Laurel approach causes sprawl. The candidate formerly known as Jim McGreevey disagreed.

Q. So the Governor ran as the candidate in favor of affordable housing?

A. Unless it's built in Woodbridge. When he was mayor of that town, McGreevey went to court to keep the developers from building Mount Laurel projects there.

Q. How did McGreevey react to the West Windsor decision?

A. He sounded like Bret Schundler. "'In many cases, the developer literally institutes litigation to coerce a municipality to accept wrong, ill-suited development. After a developer ravages a municipality, he then develops a moral purpose, is imbued by the Holy Spirit, and argues that affordable housing is needed."

Q. Why does he always say "literally?"

A. You got me.

Q. How is his administration going to handle the affordable-housing question?

A. That's up to Susan Bass Levin.

Q. Who's she?

A. She's the new commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, which oversees affordable housing. Until this year she was the longtime mayor of Cherry Hill.

Q. Cherry Hill? Wasn't that town involved in yet another recent Supreme Court decision on affordable housing?

A. You bet. The judges decided that during her tenure as Cherry Hill mayor, Levin was practicing exclusionary zoning.

Q. Was she?

A. She doesn't think so.

Q. What are you laughing at?



A. Oh, nothing. See you in traffic.