Photo

The political risks in using a governor’s perch to run for the White House should become ever clearer to Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, even as he leads some very early polls for the Republican nomination. Mr. Walker, wildly cheered last week at the Conservative Political Action Conference for his anti-union initiatives that incited state protests, seemed to suggest this somehow prepared him to deal with Islamic State terrorists. “If I can take on 100,000 protesters, I can do the same across the world,” he told the conference in denouncing radical militants.

For all his audience’s delight, the governor’s office was soon issuing a clarification that Mr. Walker wasn’t equating unionism with terrorism, as if mindful of the broader electorate that lies beyond the right-wing beauty contest presented at the conference. Mr. Walker got off easy, with no tough questioning from conservatives about some of his shifting positions on abortion and same-sex marriage that seemed trimmed for his particular audiences, as was made clear in a report last week by Trip Gabriel of The Times.

Mr. Walker and the other governors jostling for the nomination, like Chris Christie of New Jersey and Bobby Jindal of Louisiana, are finding that for all their powers and spotlighted opportunities, governors can run for the White House, but they can’t hide from their state records.

Mr. Christie’s credentials as a fiscal manager are increasingly open to criticism, particularly his mishandling of the ballooning costs of public-employee pensions. The four-year-old solution that Mr. Christie has been trumpeting as a national model has unraveled, with a judge ruling last week that he had violated the law by not making payments he promised in 2011. Beyond that, the governor clings to his party’s no-new-taxes mantra even as the multibillion-dollar debt of New Jersey’s transportation fund deepens and the state’s credit rating suffers multiple downgrades.

Mr. Jindal is blithely dealing with a looming budget gap by proposing draconian cuts of $1.2 billion. Even Louisiana Republicans were decrying a 40 percent cut for the state university until Mr. Jindal on Friday reduced that to a 6 percent cut by adjusting certain tax break programs to increase revenues. Mr. Jindal, in a recent interview with Politico, said he was proud that he had slashed the budget by a quarter and the state work force by almost a third. Mr. Walker seems no less proud of the way his new budget avoids tax increases by relying on borrowing and spending cuts, particularly for state universities.

One Republican governor mentioned as a candidate, Mike Pence of Indiana, could offer the virtue of a budget surplus. But this healthy fiscal status was bolstered by his acceptance of Medicaid expansion funds under health care reform — a no-go zone for Republican zealots like Mr. Walker and former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas as they campaign for the White House by denouncing Obamacare.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As the campaign proceeds, the record of former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida is certain to be closely vetted. He must have been indulging in wishful thinking last December in contemplating the bruising nomination cycle and saying Republicans need principled candidates willing to “lose the primary to win the general.”