They were there to hear the Repub­lican presidential front-runner speak on topics dear to their hearts – repealing Obamacare, upholding the Second Amendment, closing the Southwestern border to illegal immigrants and stopping immigration of Muslims into the U.S. until somebody figures out “what the hell is going on” with terrorists.

And they were there to hear Trump say, “We can make our country great again! Greater than ever before!”

One of the first orders of business was to criticize the country’s $19 trillion deficit that soon will be $21 trillion because of the recent hastily passed federal budget.

Trump also said the art of the deal was not used by the Obama administration in dealing with Iran.

“We give Iran $150 billion, and they’re going to be allowed to self-inspect,” he said. “And they don’t give us our prisoners back. They’re going to start new negotiations to give us our prisoners back. Three years ago, they should have said, ‘Give us our prisoners back and then we will negotiate.’”

“JUST STAND THERE”: South Carolina Attorney General Alan Wilson, the moderator, asked Trump what types of people he would appoint to the U.S. Supreme Court.

“Conservatives,” he said. “I’d want strong conservatives. Great legal scholars. Peo­ple who respect our Con­­sti­­tution. There’ve been so many bad decisions. Immigration. I want people who are truly in love with the Constitution. Most people had never heard of executive action ….

“Executive action can be undone,” he said. “Two minutes after I take an oath, I would be getting rid of them in the first hour.”

He said he went to the South­­western border and talked to Border Patrol members who really want to do their jobs but are told to just stand there.

“If we don’t have a border, we don’t have a country,” he said. “We will build a wall, and it’s going to be a real wall, with a big beautiful door. They have to come in legally.”

Trump said he has taken “tremendous heat” for his controversial statements but that he “double downed.”

“If I wasn’t in the race, nobody would be talking about illegal immigration or Islamic terrorists,” he said. “Politicians don’t want to talk about it. Our president won’t even say it.”

But, he said, since the killings in California, some of his critics are saying, “You know, he’s got a point.”

OVERREGULATED, UNDER­EDUCATED: Prompted by Wil­son, Trump lambasted large federal agencies such as the Environmental Pro­tec­tion Agency, the Jus­tice Department and the Educa­tion Department.

“Common Core is a disaster,” he said. “Bureaucrats in Washington who are making a tremendous amount of money are deciding what your children learn.”

And the EPA’s controversial ruling on clean power and waters is a “land grab.”

“We’ve got to have clean air and water, but we’ve got to get rid of the regulations,” he said. “Showers … I can’t wash my hair. They have restrictors for them. I won’t use the example of the toilet … Yes, I will. So people are flushing seven, eight, 10 times. There are so many bad regulations. They’ve overregulated.”

OBAMACARE: “It’s failing badly. By 2017, it implodes,” Trump said. “It’s a disaster. Rates have gone up, sometimes over 50 percent. Deduc­tibles are so high some people can’t pay them. Insur­ance companies have done really well. We’re going to get rid of the insurance companies.

“Obamacare is going down with or without (Su­preme Court Chief) Justice (John) Roberts. He should never have done it. I think he wanted to be popular with inside-the-beltway people. There’s no legal reason he should not have ended Obamacare the first or second time.”

THE MEDIA: The only times the TV cameras turn are to shoot pictures of protesters, Trump said.

“They are so dishonest it’s incredible. If there’s a protester they can turn them (cameras) into a pretzel. You’re dishonest people,” he said, speaking directly to reporters and cameramen across the room.

THE SECOND AMENDMENT: “We have a horrible situation. Fourteen people were killed (in California) and more are dying,” he said.

If the people present had been allowed to carry guns, the terrorists would have gone down with them, he said.

“The biggest problem with the press is they call it domestic violence,” he said. “They call the man in black the ‘mastermind.’ They glorify them. … If the ‘masterminds’ knew people in there had guns, they wouldn’t have been there.

“It’s so stupid. They’re taking guns away, but the bad guys are always going to have guns.”

THE POLICE: “The police are incredible people. They take such abuse. The police in this country are so under-appreciated.”

If you see or hear anything that seems suspicious, you should call your local police, he said.

“This isn’t about being politically correct,” Trump said. “You have to call someone.”

When it was over, Trump spent about 30 minutes signing copies of his books and “Make America Great Again” bumper stickers, T-shirts and hats.

ALL HE NEEDS IS A FLUTE AND A COBRA: Augusta Mayor Hardie Davis has been called a lot of things, but chances are he’d never been called a “snake charmer” until last week.

Wayne Hawkins, the longtime chairman of the May­ors’ Masters Reception committee, called to say there wasn’t going to be a reception next year because of the way Davis treated the committee last year. He said he was going to meet with the mayor the next day and tell him so.

Hawkins said he’d found the mayor hard to work with in addition to not living up to his promise of chipping in $2,500 for security,

“When it came time to pay up, he didn’t have it,” Haw­kins said. “And he couldn’t find time to do the radio commercials to advertise the concert, and they didn’t get out soon enough to get the word out, and we were not able to give any money to charity.”

Hawkins also said Davis had his own personal photographer following him around taking pictures and ignored Tim Conway, the event’s official photographer.

Other complaints included not being able to contact Davis and having to reprint the invitations which had his name as simply “Hardie Davis.”

“I get an e-mail that says, ‘These have to be reprinted. My name is Hardie Davis Jr.’” Hawkins said. “It was a nightmare. I’m 63 years old. I don’t know I want to go through that again.

“He never came to a committee meeting and never said ‘thank you’ for anything. He got all the glory and credit and didn’t acknowledge any of the people who had worked so hard.”

I told Hawkins to call after he met with Davis and let me know what happened, but that I was certain the mayor would talk him into doing the reception again.

The next day, Hawkins had softened. He said Davis was a smooth talker and insisted it was a “misunderstanding.”

“He’s a snake charmer,” Haw­­kins said. “He can just charm you to death with that smooth talk. But it’s still up in the air until I meet with my board.”