A memorial service for Prince was held in Minnesota on Sunday. However, absent was the “Purple Rain” singer’s sibling sister and his cremated remains, according to a report by The Wrap.

A Fox News reporter provided live tweets from the Minneapolis suburb. Local authorities blocked off several streets for traffic control and privacy. Inside the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Minnetonka, mourners paid tribute to Prince, who passed away last month at his home.

Reportedly, Prince’s full-blood sister, Tyke Nelson, who has been the face of the family since his sudden passing, was not present, nor were other family members of the fallen star. Prince was cremated shortly after his body was returned to the family by the medical examiner’s office. However, his ashes were not present at the memorial service.

Several hundred people attended the private tribute that began late in the evening. Comedian Sinbad was seen entering the building, among others who knew Prince in some form. The singer’s mentor, bassist Larry Graham, was reportedly interviewed about his friend.

Prince memorial fills Jehovah’s Witnesses hall in Minnetonka. https://t.co/SJCUeOLBs7 pic.twitter.com/crspG4r2gT — Star Tribune (@StarTribune) May 16, 2016

Prince’s sister, Tyke, is supposedly the de facto spokesperson for the family. She took to social media over the weekend ahead of the service and said that neither family members, nor Prince’s remains would be at the memorial. However, she did express support for any remembrance ceremony to honor her brother. Nelson said a sanctioned memorial would take place at some point in August. Details will be released as the date nears.

Private memorial underway for #Prince in Minnetonka. Follow @TedHallerFox9 for updates https://t.co/ash73BOZlE pic.twitter.com/lueKS97MTN — FOX 9 (@MyFOX9) May 15, 2016

Prince’s death has been the subject of controversy. While law enforcement officials have ruled out foul play, his death investigation continues. Legal analysts say the status and scope of the probe could change depending on the outcome of several variables: accounts from witnesses who may have material information about what led to Prince’s death; forensic evidence from the scene and places where Prince obtained prescription medication; and toxicology reports.

#Prince mourned at private memorial service in Minnetonka https://t.co/uAkTtzgMX0 pic.twitter.com/YyfZxGKp26 — KARE 11 (@kare11) May 16, 2016

At this time, according to multiple sources, police investigators are looking into opioid abuse; Prince reportedly had the prescription drug Percocet on his person at the time he was found unresponsive in the elevator of his home at Paisley Park.

Sources close to the pop star say he suffered with hip pain for many years, but refused to undergo surgery due to his religion; Prince was a Jehovah’s Witness. There is also the question about what doctor (possibly more than one) prescribed the opioid drugs to Prince.

Police are also investigating the reported incident a week before death that involved an emergency landing. After a concert in Atlanta, Prince’s private plane, a mere 48 minutes from his home, was diverted to Moline, Illinois. Sources say Prince was suffering from the flu and needed emergency treatment. Witnesses described seeing Prince carried off the aircraft.

Shortly after Prince died, a debate emerged again over healthcare reform and the rising numbers of deaths associated with opiate addiction and overdose. During his weekly address, President Barack Obama hosted hip-hop artist Macklemore. The pair talked about the opioid crisis in America.

“Addiction doesn’t always start in some dark alley, it often starts in a medicine cabinet,” Obama said during the Saturday program.

Obama highlighted the progress he and his team have made in decreasing narcotic addiction. He pointed to his focus on law enforcement and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. A provision is included that supports mandatory drug treatment.

Democratic presidential hopeful, Bernie Sanders, supports treating drug abuse as a mental health crisis, not a criminal act. Obama continues to challenge Congress for increased funding to support programs of intervention and eradication.

Macklemore, a former addict, spoke about losing a friend who died from an overdose of painkillers. The rapper is now trying to help others from going down that dark road.

“If I hadn’t gotten the help I needed when I needed, I definitely would not be here today,” Macklemore said.

It’s unclear if Prince’s death is attributed to a drug overdose, but all signs are pointing in that direction. However, an official cause of death has not been declared.

[Photo by Kevin Winter/Getty Images for NCLR]