Second suspect in custody in San Diego

Russell Britton, suspected in the murder of Lafayette's Nathaniel Tallman, will make his first court appearance at the Boulder County Jail at 2 p.m. Monday.

Britton, 58, is being held without bond on suspicion of first-degree murder in the Boulder County Jail after being arrested late Friday night. He will appear before a county court judge in the jail's courtroom to be advised of the charges he's facing.

Britton has two prior arrests in Colorado, according to public records. Arvada police arrested him in 1983 on felony forgery charges, and he was arrested for a misdemeanor contempt of court charge by the Larimer County Sheriff's Office in 1999.

A second suspect in Tallman's murder, Moises Cazares Mendez, 26, is being held at the San Diego Central Jail in San Diego, Calif., on a $1,025,000 bond.

Mendez, who was taken into custody by U.S. Customs and Border Protection about mid-day Saturday, does not yet have a court date scheduled. He is expected to be extradited to Boulder County, according to San Diego County Sheriff's Department officials. If he doesn't agree to extradition, a hearing will be scheduled, officials said Sunday.

Mendez has a lengthy arrest record in Colorado dating back to a drunken driving arrest in Longmont in July 2006, according to Colorado Bureau of Investigation records. His record includes an arrest in Adams County in 2009 for assault, menacing with a weapon.

Most recently, Mendez on Feb. 18 — a little more than three weeks after Tallman was reported missing — was arrested by the Boulder County Sheriff's Office on a misdemeanor charge of driving with a revoked license. That case remains open, according to the bureau.

Lafayette police, who had been investigating Tallman's disappearance since he vanished in late January, said Saturday that the body recovered Thursday near Lusk, Wyo., was Tallman.

Deputy Larimer County Coroner Greg Fairman said that an autopsy was performed Friday, but further details about what it revealed would be released by Boulder County officials.

On Sunday, Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett said that he couldn't provide additional details about the case, which remains under investigation.

Lafayette police are still asking anyone with information to contact them at 303-604-8014 or to email policetips@cityoflafayette.com.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com