Topics: AlterNet, Congress, Dr. Seuss, GOP, John Boehner, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

America is caught in the throes of the 114th Congress. May the world take pity on us. They are so gridlocked they can’t even agree that sex trafficking is a bad thing. It is certain, even years before the next election cycle, that we will be calling 114 Congress the worst ever, just as we called the 113th Congress the worst ever.

Then again, that wasn’t true. The 112th was actually the worst ever, at least statistically. The 113th passed 296 laws. The 112th passed only 283. In any case, even those meager numbers should be judged on a curve. A third of the laws passed in these two Congresses were ceremonial in nature, like the historic last measure passed by the 113th: a commemoration of the “centennial of the passenger pigeon extinction.”

In 1948, Harry S. Truman won an historic surprise election by railing against the “Do Nothing” Congress. That sorry body passed 900 bills. One wonders what Truman would have said about today’s legislators? House Speaker John Boehner memorably asked that the Congress not be judged on the number of laws it passed, but how many it repealed. Well, that would be zero. Sorry, Mr. Speaker.

Meanwhile, we had philandering congressmen, indicted congressmen, cocaine arrests, and one filibuster during which Dr. Seuss’s “Green Eggs and Ham” was recited.

There was the unending Benghazi blather that concluded nothing nefarious went on leading up to that tragic incident. There were the three billion attempts to repeal Obamacare. Nothing meaningful passed to aid the economy, rebuild infrastructure, or deal with millions of illegal immigrants in a sane and compassionate manner. No budget could be agreed upon.

Meanwhile, money roars into the system, thanks to the Supreme Court’sCitizens United decision, and our elected officials appear to be bought and branded by moneyed interests. Cynicism is rampant, and it is no mystery why approval of Congress is approaching single digits. Still, were 112 and 113 the worst Congresses ever? Probably. But there were a few that approached them, simply in terms of historically bad laws passed.

1. The 5th United States Congress

In 1798, the United States was in an undeclared war with France. France was seizing American ships because the U.S. had been too cozy with France’s enemy, Great Britain, and because the U.S. had conveniently refused to repay the new Republican France the money it borrowed during the American Revolution (the U.S. claimed it owed the money to the old French monarchy, not the new French Republic). The President was John Adams, successor to George Washington, and not particularly popular. Adams’ Federalist Party was in control of Congress, and their solution to Adams’ personality issues was to pass the Alien and Sedition Acts. Purportedly passed to quell the threat from non-citizens in cahoots with France, the real political reason was to quell the threat from the Democratic-Republican Party of Thomas Jefferson, who sympathized with the French and who stood ready to defeat the Federalists in the next election.

The Alien and Sedition Acts not only made it harder to become an American citizen (14 years as opposed to the former five years), but allowed the government to arrest, imprison and/or deport any non-citizen who posed a “danger” to national security. More insidious, the Acts allowed the government to do the same to anyone, citizen or not, who spoke out against the federal government. This threatened to undo many of the freedoms the fledgling American republic stood for. Predictably, this did not serve to increase Adams’ popularity. He and the Federalists were defeated in the next election by Thomas Jefferson, and the Acts were allowed to expire. All that is, except for one of the acts, the Alien Enemies Act, which the U.S. still had in effect during World War II, and used to arrest, imprison and seize the property of Japanese, German and Italian citizens living in the U.S.

2. The 31st United States Congress

In 1850 the country was simmering with sectional conflict over the “peculiar institution,” slavery. Already the 31st Congress had passed the Compromise of 1850, which admitted California into the union as a free state, and allowed slavery in the Utah and New Mexico territories until its residents voted on the issue. The Compromise was yet another effort (the Missouri Compromise of 1820 being another one) to fend off the looming threat of succession and Civil War.

In September 1850, the Congress, in a capitulation to slavery advocates, passed the Fugitive Slave Act. This heinous legislation removed one of the few avenues escaped slaves had to gain their freedom. Prior to this Act, if a slave could escape to a free state or territory, he or she might have had hope of protection. Free states could claim that slave state laws did not apply in free states, and that slaves were people, not property. The Fugitive Slave Act changed that. Under the law, special commissioners were appointed to enforce the Act. Escaped slaves could not testify in their own behalf, and there was no jury trial to decide their fate. Commissioners were paid for each decision rendered, and remarkably, they were paid twice as much if they rendered a decision in favor of the slave owner ($10 vs. $5). Penalties were imposed on any marshals who refused to follow the Act, as well as anyone who aided in helping slaves escape. Bounties were paid to anyone who captured and returned a slave to his or her owner. Predictably, the Fugitive Slave Act created an uproar in free states, and resulted in more and louder abolitionists. Free states passed laws attempting to overrule the Act. The Underground Railroad grew larger and more efficient. All this ultimately led to the Civil War everyone wanted to avoid.