This will come as blasphemy to liberals, but Richard Nixon and Barack Obama have something in common, something that’s usually overlooked but is a significant factor in how they performed and how they are perceived.

How could that be? Nixon was a voice of political conservatism, a moderate voice as president but still a spokesman for the right, while Obama is clearly a man of the left.

What they share is a liability, one that’s a sad commentary on the politics of Nixon’s day and ours.

Nixon, who announced his resignation 40 years ago Friday, relished his public image as one tough hombre. To get the high office he coveted, Nixon had to pander to some of the most hard-right elements and instincts in a very conservative GOP, one dominated then by its Goldwater wing, the tea party of the times.

But Nixon, by all accounts, was also personally insecure. Once in the Oval Office he eagerly sought acceptance, if not more, from the liberals of his day and labored long to get it.

His opening to China was, at the time, a stunner. Remember, this was a guy who bought into Joseph McCarthy’s red-scare hysteria and loyalty oath demands in the 1950s. Extending a friendly hand to China was a vintage liberal priority that rocked many of his conservative admirers.

But on domestic policy Nixon went even further in offering the olive branch to liberal Democrats. (Remember, his chief domestic policy adviser was Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a leading liberal intellectual.)

In rapid order, Nixon ordered a higher minimum wage for federal contractors; sponsored Earth Day in 1971, the Clean Air Act and creation of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Legal Services Corporation to help the poor; ended the military draft; backed lowering the federal voting age to 18; and voiced support for some form of universal insurance coverage.

There was more of the same. And it all sounded like something from a Democratic National Convention platform. At the very least it should have earned him a nod of approval from the left. Alas, it never happened.

He was “Tricky Dick,” the label liberals hung on him during his early rise in California. He remained a constant target of Democratic ridicule and disrespect, even as he almost slavishly sought his rivals’ approval. If it scarred him psychologically and contributed to the bitter vindictiveness that marred the last days of his presidency … well, it should come as no great surprise.

Fast-forward 40 years and what do we find: Obama getting a similar back-of-the-hand rebuff from Republicans — and as much disrespect as Nixon, maybe more — no matter what he proposes, even if it’s something the GOP advocated in the past.

Even the Affordable Care Act (“Obama­care,” a Satanic piece of work as GOP rhetoric now has it) has roots in Republican conservative orthodoxy.

Something like it was offered by Republicans in 1993 in an effort to head off first lady Hillary Clinton’s health insurance proposal.

It even included the individual mandate, reputedly dreamed up first by policy mavens at the right-wing Heritage Foundation but repudiated by Republicans once Obama embraced it.

Indeed, Obamacare is a virtual copy of the health insurance law previously enacted in Massachusetts at the behest of Mitt Romney, then the Republican governor — something he all but repudiated as a presidential candidate.

The list of such GOP ideas Republicans turned their backs on once Obama adopted them is not a short one. The Troubled Asset Relief Program, which helped avert the worst of the recession, was signed into law by President George W. Bush but was denounced by Republicans once it fell under the jurisdiction of a newly elected Obama. Ditto the auto bailout, something first suggested by Republicans before Obama bought into it.

How about infrastructure rebuilding? Eisenhower Republicans spawned the great national highway building boom of the 1950s, and the GOP since then has regularly supported infrastructure repair as national policy.

But Obama’s infrastructure plans have met only a resounding “no” from current Republicans.

That’s where the Nixon-Obama similarities end.

Because Democrats enacted Nixon’s proposals — and why not, they were Democratic initiatives to begin with — and the country benefited.

But the Republican strategy of denying Obama any accomplishment from Day One of his presidency has left the government mostly paralyzed at a critical period and crippled the presidency as an institution for leadership.

The Democrats’ treatment of Nixon 40 years ago, spurning his olive branch overtures, was a shabby business. The GOP’s similar treatment of Obama is, if anything, even worse in its consequences for the country.

John Farmer is a Star-Ledger columnist. His column appears Sundays. Have an opinion? Go to nj.com/opinion.