One month ago, James Poulos, the self-described “radicaltarian” blogger, podcaster, scholar, and musician, dropped a bomb on the political discourse with the beginning of a short (but long) series at The Federalist called the Pink Police State. It’s an idea that’s been rolling around in Poulos’ cluttered but razor-sharp brain for a while now, and he finally got it out in long form.

In short, the Pink Police State is a cultural schism that began in the late 1990s resulting in an alternating maternal nanny state and dangerously permissive personal life.

What we have today then is something quite “neo,” historically speaking: a robust regulatory state that pursues health and safety at the expense of liberty in the context of a culture that demands robust interpersonal freedom. Rather than stamping out hedonistic pursuits and pleasure-centered living, 1984 style, the new statism creates a “safe” space for their “healthy” experience. Yet, rather than expanding the project limitlessly, Brave New World style, so as to make all pleasure official, the new statism tacitly acknowledges that our most potent appetites can never be fully domesticated, even with all the tools of force, surveillance, and coercion at the government’s disposal.

The term Pink Police State itself is a brilliant derivation of a scene in Marilyn Manson’s iconoclastic 1998 video, “Dope Show,” in which police officers in pink riot gear alternately hold back a screaming public, dance on top of cars, and make out with each other.

Although most political commentators identify the terrorist attacks of 9/11/01 as the formative event of our generation, Poulos instead uses the WTO protests in Seattle in 1999 (the “Battle in Seattle”) as the first skirmish in the battle of the Pink Police State, a much more important modern “war”.

A media sensation, the unrest seemed to confirm that the progress of Western democracy toward the post-communist political economy was threatened by a new, domestic adversary—one quite unlike the external foe whose defeat had brought a sudden end to the Cold War. To be sure, some enemies remained abroad. In a handful of “rogue” or “failed” states, Western strategists faced a growing assortment of what Hans Magnus Enzensberger would later term “radical losers”—terrorists, guerillas, and criminals acting beyond the reach or the view of sovereign powers. In certain troubling instances, these problem actors worked together, or even converged. But from North Korea to Afghanistan, these perils appeared mainly to be remainders and aftereffects of the Cold War. No new vision had seized power in a way that challenged the primacy of the West.

So while the War on Terror is on the decline, and 9/11 likely its last gasp, the war on global corporatism was just declared, and Seattle its first nascent cry.

Over the four-story series, Poulos weaves an intricate and fascinating tapestry of pop culture references, philosophical concepts, and political arguments from Fight Club, Bridget Jones, Nietzsche, Fifty Shades of Grey, Tocqueville, Plato, Obamacare, and the Matrix. To many (read the comments at your own peril), his dense prose is nothing more than pseudointellectual psychobabble. But upon close inspection, Poulos has crafted a fascinating new lens through which people are viewing our cultural panorama.