MANCHESTER: A sickening act of violence in the Grand Final shaped and disfigured a dramatic Super League triumph for St Helens over their fiercest rivals Wigan at Old Trafford on Saturday.

As Saints' fans celebrated their team's long-awaited 14-6 victory, Wigan's prop forward Ben Flower was left to reflect ruefully on a moment of stupidity and brutality which saw him become the first man to be sent off in a Grand Final after 123 seconds.

Welshman Flower punched Saints five-eighth Lance Hohaia in the face and then, as the New Zealand international lay dazed on the floor, kneeled over his helpless victim and struck him flush to the head again.

Red card offence: Ben Flower of Wigan Warriors punches Lance Hohaia. Photo: Screengrab

The incident, which TV replays suggested could have been sparked by Hohaia's earlier forearm smash on Flower, prompted a melee between players from both sides.

Advertisement

It might easily have led to further red cards but referee Phil Bentham had no choice about dismissing Flower, who held his head in his hands after comprehending his madness.

Though Hohaia was unable to play any further part in the match, it was Wigan who inevitably were to suffer most for Flower's folly, having to play for 78 minutes with 12 men.

Sia Soliola of St Helens celebrates in front of Saints fans. Photo: Getty Images

Former Sydney Roosters centre Sia Soliola signed off at St Helens in style by scoring a try.

Victory saw Saints crowned champions of the English-based Super League for the first time since 2006 and also meant they at last came out on top after losing their previous five Grand Finals.

Soliola, who will join Canberra Raiders in the NRL next year after five seasons at Langtree Park, had himself been involved in two of those Grand Final defeats during his time in north-west England.

Marching orders: referee Phil Bentham sends off Ben Flower of Wigan Warriors. Photo: Getty Images

But it was third time lucky for the 28-year-old, although St Helens were made to work desperately hard by their Lancashire rivals.

Nevertheless, Wigan led 6-2 at halftime thanks to winger Joe Burgess's try.

However, Soliola bundled his way over early in the second half for the League Leaders' Shield winners before Tommy Makinson's try secured a 14-6 victory that was also the perfect farewell present for Saints coach Nathan Brown, returning to Australia for family reasons.

St Helens celebrate their championship win. Photo: Getty Images

The Saints played well in the first half but despite the one-man advantage, Wigan's defence remained robust, most notably in the face of a dynamic charge from Mose Masoe.

Indeed, after weathering the storm, it was the Warriors who got the first points of the contest in the 16th minute.

St Helens were penalised for obstruction in their own half as winger Adam Swift tried to break, and Matty Smith bisected the posts from 25 metres out.

St Helens coach Nathan Brown is heading back to Australia. Photo: Getty Images

There was no let-up from Wigan but a stoic St Helens defence was able to hold out.

And their reward came after 29 minutes when Mark Percival equalised with a straightforward penalty.

With the clock ticking down to half-time, Wigan winger Burgess grabbed the game's first try, finding space, following a pass from Melbourne Storm-bound half-back Blake Green, to slide into the corner as the St Helens defence rushed up.

But Smith missed the touchline conversion.

Wigan stifled a handful of early second-half attacks but they could not prevent Soliola from burrowing over the line in the 53rd minute, with Percival landing the easy conversion.

Liam Farrell was close to helping Wigan strike back immediately, gliding through the Saints defence but Makinson made a brilliant cover tackle five metres out.

The ball was quickly recycled, but Matty Bowen's offload was spilt, and the chance was gone.

Smith then pulled a Wigan penalty wide of the uprights from 20 metres, as the Warriors searched desperately for a route back into the game.

With 12 minutes remaining, and the next score seemingly vital, Makinson delivered the decisive blow for Saints.

Rising high above Bowen and Smith, the winger claimed Paul Wellens's up-and-under to ground the ball and stretch the Saints' lead before Percival converted again.

Wigan couldn't find a way through late on as the title passed to their fiercest foes.

Agencies