CLIFTON, N.J., Nov. 04, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Sutherland Healthcare Solutions has announced its most recent Net Promoter Score (NPS), an impressive +79 on a scale ranging from -100 to +100. Sutherland’s score is well above the norm for most industries, especially healthcare. NPS, developed by Bain and Company, measures client loyalty and the potential for market growth. As the healthcare industry works to adopt a more client-centric stance, gaining client loyalty is a pivotal concern.



“As a company with solutions that help our clients become more responsive to the needs of their customers, this score is an achievement we are especially proud of,” said Amy Grazer, Sutherland Healthcare Solutions’ Head of Strategic Initiatives and Brand. “It speaks not only to Sutherland’s ongoing commitment to our clients, but also to the ability of our solutions to improve the experience of the end users our clients serve.”

Indeed, bringing the experience of the end-user to the center of the healthcare conversation is more vital now than ever. As the impacts of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) continue to ripple through the healthcare ecosystem, provider organizations in particular are vulnerable to changing demands from consumers and new reimbursement schemes.

While noting that this year’s NPS represents Sutherland’s third consecutive year of strong scores, Ms. Grazer stressed that the score resulted from very specific efforts:

Sutherland focused on sustained client engagement

Sutherland tailored its outreach so each client received the level of engagement they needed

Sutherland doubled down on client dialogue, ensuring that client pain points were communicated to the right people at the right time

Sutherland Healthcare Solutions CEO Thomas Laur added to Ms. Grazer’s comments, “so much of today’s healthcare landscape is opaque. But one thing is abundantly clear: exchanges are bringing more consumers to market, and regulations are fostering more consumer-driven care. Sutherland Healthcare Solutions’ most recent NPS makes us so proud because it is a direct vote of confidence from clients who thrive in this increasingly competitive, consumer-focused space.”

To download a white paper detailing the relationship between NPS, customer-centricity and growth, click here. To learn more about Sutherland Healthcare Solutions, contact us at healthcare@sutherlandglobal.com.

About Sutherland Healthcare Solutions

Sutherland Healthcare Solutions is a subsidiary of Sutherland Global Services, a global provider of business process and technology management services. Headquartered in Clifton, New Jersey, Sutherland Healthcare Solutions is a leading provider of consulting, business process outsourcing (BPO), information technology outsourcing (ITO), and analytics solutions to the entire healthcare ecosystem. Sutherland Healthcare Solutions has 3,750 dedicated employees in 10+ global sites delivering customized and scalable solutions including contact center, coding, revenue cycle management, healthcare IT, provider data management, experience consulting, and population and payment solutions.



Media Contact: Amy Grazer, Head of Strategic Initiatives and Brand 973-518-3841 or Amy.Grazer@sutherlandglobal.com