The local Jewish community gathered to celebrate Hanukkah with a menorah lighting ceremony

Mayor Cecil Gutierrez lights the shamash while Rabbi Yerachmiel Gorelik, left, and the other dignitaries watch at the Menorah lighting ceremony celebrating the eight days of Hanukkah Sunday at the Loveland Museum/Gallery. ( James Garcia )

The sixth annual Loveland menorah lighting ceremony celebrated the fifth day of Hanukkah, the eight-day Jewish holiday, and was one of 11,000 public lightings around the world.

On Sunday, the Loveland Jewish community came together to hear Rabbi Yerachmiel Gorelik, of the Fort Collins Chabad of Northern Colorado, speak on the origins of the menorah, the symbolism of the holiday and to sing some traditional Jewish songs of the season -- and of course, light six of the menorah lamps.

"We're going to light up the beautiful city of Loveland with our menorah," Gorelik said.

"The message is very universal," he said, talking about a small group of oppressed Jews rising up and liberating themselves from tyranny, reclaiming their temple. They only had enough oil to light their menorah for one day, but in a Hanukkah miracle, it lasted for eight days.

"The symbolism behind it is: Don't fight the darkness, rather shed a little bit of light into the world," Gorelik said, talking about introducing kindness into the world despite any dark days. "You can light up the world with one candle, but you still have the power of that one candle."

Mayor Cecil Gutierrez lit the first lamp, a lamp known as the shamash, one that is higher than the rest of the lights, used to help ignite the others or as an additional light. Other dignitaries in attendance were Sen. Kevin Lundberg, City Councilor Troy Krenning and Larimer County Commissioner Lew Gaiter.

"It is truly a pleasure to come here and with you all a happy Hanukkah," Gutierrez said to the crowd of around 80 people who braved the chilly weather. "It's great to have this kind of fellowship and learn about each other."

Advertisement

"We liked it a lot. We just wanted to come out and see what was going on," said Bob Herrmann of Loveland, who came with his wife, Ann, for their first time attending a Jewish ceremony. "The fact they knew we weren't Jewish, but were still so welcoming, it was very nice," she said.

The couple tried out the latkes and applesauce served at the event along with chocolate doughnuts and kosher hot cocoa.

Laura Levine of Loveland was credited by Gorelik as the "first Jew of Loveland," and was among the first to help organize the Loveland Jewish community. She was asked to open the ceremony and thanked everyone who turned out.

"Loveland is traditionally thought of as, from what I can tell, a Christian town," she said, saying it is refreshing to see other religions represented. "It's nice that the community is aware that it's Hanukkah."

Ron Putlack of Loveland has been in attendance each year, helping the rabbi set up for the event. His wife Joan, who is Catholic, said they have a menorah and a Christmas tree in their home, embracing both religions.

"I think it's great for all religions to learn about the other religions," she said. "It's a good education for us ... and it's good to have this in Loveland because there's more of a Jewish population in Fort Collins, so it's good for them to see this."

This year was special for the holiday as both the Jewish lunar calendar and the commonly used Gregorian calendar lined up so that the first day of Hanukkah and Thanksgiving were on the same day, a coincidence that won't happen again for hundreds, possibly thousands of years. The phenomenon is being called Thanksgivukkah by some.

Dan Wavle of Estes Park said his town is looking forward to having a similar celebration next year -- something Gorelik said he is interested in doing. Wavle and his family came down to be a part of the ceremony, saying he usually feels like a lone Jew in Colorado and that it's encouraging to have the small religious community come together.

"We have such a wonderful and diverse culture here and that's why I come here," Gutierrez said, this being his fifth year attending the event. "It's a fun learning and hearing the stories of Hanukkah ... and the music, of course!"

James Garcia can be reached at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @JamesGarciaRH.