Republican presidential candidate Chris Christie used his own bully pulpit last week to assert that he’s a Catholic in good standing – even though he has ignored the church’s long-standing opposition to contraceptives.

AP Gov. Chris Christie

“I’m a Catholic, but I’ve used birth control, and not just the rhythm method, OK,” Christie said as he roved a New Hampshire diner with microphone in hand. “Does that make me an awful Catholic because I believed and practiced that function during part of my life? I don’t think so.”

The too-much-information moment made plenty of people cringe. But it also succeeded in getting some talking about something other than Donald Trump.

Yet, one person who stayed conspicuously silent was Archbishop John J. Myers of the Newark Archdiocese, the state’s most powerful Catholic prelate, who has the stature to scold a highly visible member of his flock who publicly flouts Catholic doctrine. Myers hasn’t been afraid to play the role of the doctrinal enforcer before, issuing a well-timed letter that put pressure on Catholic officials who supported abortion rights, or lobbying against same-sex marriage or fighting provisions in Obamacare, citing government infringement on religion.

But this time, Myers is remaining on the sidelines – and mum.

A spokesman for Myers said it was simply “inappropriate” to comment on what Governor Christie – or what any other 2016 presidential candidate, for that matter – has to say.

“We understand that he has an opinion,’’ said James Goodness, the spokesman. “That’s a personal issue that may be dealt with individually. We are not going to comment.”

To a certain extent, Myers’ reticence is surprising, given how he didn’t hesitate in 2004 to use his doctrinal muscle to scold Catholic politicians who support abortion rights. And he had plenty to say about last year’s public battle over a provision in the Affordable Care Act requiring employers to offer contraception coverage in their health insurance. Yet, Christie’s declaration – and Myers’ reticence – over birth control reflects the shifting realities of Catholic politics.

For one thing, Christie’s views on birth control are hardly out of the mainstream – most American Catholics have used birth control and view the church’s ban on artificial contraceptives as antiquated. Nearly 76 percent of U.S. Catholics say the church should lift its ban on artificial birth control, according to a Pew Research study in March. And nearly 82 percent of Catholic voters polled by Gallup in 2012 said birth control is “morally defensible.”

Thomas J. Reese, a senior analyst at National Catholic Reporter, said he’s not surprised at Myers’ reluctance to stay silent about Christie’s remarks.

“These bishops are caught between the rock and hard place on this issue,’’ Reese said. “If they lay down the law, and go after someone like Christie, what do they say to the other 90 percent of Catholics doing the same thing?”

Another factor may be Pope Francis, who has set a new, inclusive tone since his election in 2012. Francis has called for more tolerance and acceptance of divorced and gay Catholics, and has warned that the church’s obsession with issues such as abortion and gay marriage could alienate millions of ordinary worshipers and weaken the church’s role in the world.

Given those realities, it may not be in Myers’ long-term interests to pick a fight with Christie over birth control. In addition, it makes no sense alienating Christie at a time when he’s evolved into a strident foe of abortion.

Christie, the first New Jersey governor to address the annual antiabortion rally on the anniversary of the Roe v. Wade decision that legalized abortion, has emerged into an antiabortion foe, casting his budget cuts to Planned Parenthood clinics as evidence of his antiabortion convictions, and challenging Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton to answer questions about Planned Parenthood’s practice of selling fetal tissue for medical research.

Christie and Myers have forged a friendship over the years. Myers conducted the inaugural Mass for Christie in 2009. And Christie avoided criticizing Myers when his office came under fire over the supervision of a priest who had violated a lifetime ban on ministering to children in 2013.

Goodness denied that polls or other strategic concerns played any role in Myers’ decision not to comment on the birth control issue. And as to Myers’ friendship with Christie: “They are friends, they’ve been friends and they are going to continue to be friends.’’

Myers hasn’t been entirely silent on the issue of birth control. He was a visible figure in the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops’ campaign to block the Affordable Care Act provision that initially required employers – including Catholic-affiliated schools and hospitals – to provide health insurance that covered birth control costs.

But in that flap, Myers and the other bishops were focused on the larger constitutional issues as they argued that the law, popularly known as Obamacare, was an attack on religious liberty.

Myers flexed his clout on other political issues. In 2004, Myers issued a strongly worded pastoral statement declaring that Catholics who supported abortion rights are being “objectively dishonest” when they seek Communion.

Although it never mentioned James McGreevey, then the governor, by name, Myers’ letter – coupled with similar criticisms from other bishops who did name him directly – prompted McGreevey to announce that he would stop receiving Communion.

Goodness said Myers was simply trying to offer some clarity for parishioners – a similar debate was percolating in the presidential contest that year between Democrat John Kerry and Republican incumbent George W. Bush.

In past interviews, Myers has cast himself as a champion of Catholic tradition orthodoxy. In a 2013 interview, he expressed confidence in the “new evangelization,’’ a kind of back-to-basics in church teaching that will “strengthen people as they hear, understand and embrace the faith.’

But this time, the public is hearing Christie’s own views. The archbishop is staying silent.