GRAND RAPIDS, MI – Health care costs and a talent shortage are the top concerns on its members' minds, according to a survey released by the Grand Rapids Area Chamber of Commerce on Monday, Jan. 14.

While the cost of health care remained the top concern of members for the fourth year in a row, the difficulty of finding qualified talent was the No. 2 concern for the second year in a row, according to the survey of nearly 700 members.

"Momentum continues to build in the Grand Rapids business community, and we need to continue to focus on policy that supports a healthy business climate," said Rick Baker, president and CEO of the Grand Rapids Area Chamber of Commerce in a news release.

According to the survey results, 57 percent of their members said they would give their employees a raise and 34 percent said they would hire more employees if health care costs were contained.

"There was also strong support for increased price transparency and reducing the burden of compliance with the Affordable Care Act (ACA)," the chamber said.

"The message from members has been clear and consistent on health care," said Andy

Johnston, vice president of Government & Corporate Affairs. "In 2016, the chamber will remain fiercely opposed to additional health care mandates and efforts to extend or increase the uncompetitive Health Insurance Claims Assessment Tax.

Other top issues included: access to primary care for employees, affordable energy, invasive species, high school graduation rates, skilled-trades training, and public transit.



Meanwhile, 80 percent of the respondents said they hired or added new jobs in the last year due to business growth. However, 61 percent said they struggled to find qualified applicants compared to 51 percent one year earlier.

As a result, 71 percent of the chamber members said they increased their recruiting, 32 percent increased wages and 32 percent reported training in-house to fill new jobs. Thirty-one percent said they hired less qualified workers and 27 percent said they increased overtime.

"Thirty-one percent responded that positions were not filled because they could not find qualified talent. When it comes to finding qualified employees, social media replaced recruiting events as the top tool," the chamber said in its news release.

"We will continue to advocate on behalf of our members in support of creating a strong talent system from early childhood education to the K-12 system as well as programs like Michigan's Skilled Trades Training Fund that raise the capabilities of our existing workforce," said Allie Bush, the chamber's director of Government Affairs.

"Michigan's economic recovery has taken some pressure off local government budgets, but wise investment remains critical to help us address legacy costs and better prepare us for the next rainy day," said Josh Lunger, director of Government Affairs.

A summary of the survey can be found at grandrapids.org/government-affairs-survey.

Jim Harger covers business for MLive/Grand Rapids Press. Email him at jharger@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter or Facebook or Google+.