Northwest Texas Healthcare System is planning a $17.5 million clinics upgrade to reduce emergency room overcrowding and delays that can keep patients waiting for a doctor for over an hour, according to recent Medicare data.

At a recent Amarillo Hospital District board of managers meeting, Northwest Chief Operating Officer John McDonald presented documents detailing the projects.

The cost will be covered by grants from Texas Department of Health and Human Services through its Delivery System Reform Incentive Program, which aims to spark innovation and enhance health care access in Texas.

The projects are expected to reduce wait times and costs associated with emergency room visits; areas the hospital has been focusing on, Northwest CEO Mark Crawford said. Patients at Northwest waited an average of 67 minutes before seeing a doctor, according to a propublica.org report of Medicaid data collected from April 2012 to April 2013.

However, wait times have now been shortened to about a half-hour over the past several months, Crawford said.

“And we could do better,” Crawford said.

A major factor affecting emergency departments across the country is overcrowding caused by patients seeking treatment for nonemergency conditions. Low-priority injuries and illnesses fill emergency departments while high-priority trauma conditions are continuously moved to the front of the line. So while a patient with a sore throat might not cause a delay for a heart attack patient, he or she might cause patients with less serious maladies to wait for treatment, Crawford said.

“It clogs up the whole system,” he said.

The first step will be to expand operations at three clinics the system runs in Amarillo:

■ J.O. Wyatt Community Health Center, 1411 E. Amarillo Blvd.

■ Northwest Texas Women’s and Children’s Center, 814 Martin Road;

■ Northwest Texas Women’s and Children’s Center, 1900 S.E. 34th Ave.

Each clinic will be open an additional 11 hours each week, according to the plan.

“The goal is to increase access (and) to reduce unnecessary utilization of the emergency room, therefore reducing the cost of care within the market,” Crawford said.

Northwest has identified 1,400 people who used the hospital’s emergency room four or more times a year, effectively using it as a primary care provider, Crawford said.

Another problem is the inability of many people to discern a serious medical condition from symptoms of common conditions, Northwest Emergency Director Dr. Stephen Newman said.

To combat these problems, the hospital is implementing a patient navigation system to direct patients to the proper care providers. The system is a hotline where nurses will be trained to diagnose a patient’s symptoms and send them to the correct clinic or emergency room for treatment.

“Basically you’re doing the same thing as a 911 operator might do,” Crawford explained. “They go through a triage process to see how urgent it is and how emergent it is.”

“It will be like having your own nurse on call,” Northwest Chief Financial Officer Gene Winters said.

The patient navigation system will be directed at the 1,400 patients Northwest identified as frequent emergency room visitors, but Crawford said the program would be expanded later on. The program is set to be operational by Sept. 30, but it could be online earlier, Winters said.

Northwest also plans to open new urgent care clinics attached to or housed within its three existing clinics.

Some new construction is expected, but some buildings already have extra space available, Winters said. The first clinic, housed within J.O. Wyatt Clinic, will be opened before the end of September and another, attached to the Women’s and Children’s location on 34th, will be open by the end of the year.

“But as soon as possible,” Winters said. “It depends on what we run into with permits and construction.”

A new seniors’ clinic will round out the expansion. The location of the clinic has not yet been selected, but Winters said potential sites have been identified. The clinic should be operational by the end of 2014, he said.

The programs are not based on any set model; Northwest has developed the expansion project from scratch. Proposals had to be approved by the government before they were funded.

The Affordable Care Act spurred the hospital’s clinic expansion project, Crawford said.

“I think it was more of a punch in the gut in the beginning,” he said. “I think it’s making us rethink how we deliver care. I mean, that’s what these four projects are all about.”

Health care is beginning to shift toward preventative medicine and treating people before they get sick, he said.

“It has caused us to think outside of the box more than we were before,” he said.

Source: Northwest Texas Healthcare System