Folsom police officer James Dorris walked into the glaring, ringside lights at the city’s community center Saturday with two championship belts hoisted over his head, and soon left the building holding a third, after a victory over heavyweight champion Casey Johnson left him the undisputed master of a trifecta of weight divisions.

The match between Dorris and Johnson was a highly anticipated one. Both men were repeat gold medalists for boxing in the Western States Police and Fire Games. Between 2009 and 2011, Dorris accrued a series of stunning victories in Northern California’s Badge vs. Badge amateur boxing league for law enforcement, correctional officers and firefighters. He eventually won the International Amateur Boxing Super Cruiser Weight Championship, followed by decisive win that grabbed him the IBAC champion belt in the standard cruiser weight division. Meanwhile, Johnson, an Oakland police officer, was fighting in the same league. Johnson won the International Amateur Boxing Heavyweight champion in 2011. Both men have been defending champions since.

Dorris and Johnson have wanted to fight each other for nearly a decade. An 11-year veteran of the Folsom Police Department, Dorris agreed to bulk-up and take on Johnson in a heavyweight bout hosted by the Battle of the Badges fighting circuit. Their confrontation was the main event on a 14-bout fight card that marked the first boxing tournament in Folsom in nine years.

“This is a battle between two real champions that no one is going to forget,” Battle of the Badges promoter Israel Montes told the crowd.

Dorris received a roaring hometown welcome as he walked to the ring. Making the same walk was boxing trainer Shon Moore, who has been Dorris’s coach since 2009. Dorris hasn’t lost a fight since having Moore in his corner.

Johnson came into the community center looking strong, confident and ready to hit the city of Folsom with an upset.

It wasn’t to be.

Johnson opened up Round 1 with a direct jab, though he was instantly paid back by a hard counter-jab to his face. From there, Dorris used quick, coordinated footwork to move like a matador, landing a walloping body shot to Johnson’s ribs that echoed to the back of the room. Dorris quickly followed with a left hook to Johnson’s head. The Oakland officer tried to get aggressive: He threw a long double-jab, but Dorris picked off both punches with the inside of his left glove before pivoting inside to deliver two hurting hooks to Johnson’s midsection. Johnson switched to defense for the rest of Round 1. That didn’t stop Dorris from scoring another bitter body shot before the fighters went to their corners.

When Round 2 got underway, Johnson tried to go on the hunt, landing a good straight jab to Dorris’s head. Dorris jumped to the side, racking Johnson’s ribs again with a big right hook before going to the face with a stinging double-jab. Johnson came back with a clean, straight punch, though Dorris made him pay for the move with a left hook and then a strong missile to the kidney. With each boxer trying to control the other’s rhythm, Dorris managed to score another jab. Johnson tried a classic one-two combination, but Dorris deftly slipped both punches with some pretty side-to-side shoulder and head movement.

At the beginning of Round 3, Johnson made a final effort to take command. He charged Dorris, throwing his long jab and a wide hook that partially connected. The next jab Johnson launched costed him, with Dorris using its opening to drill a tight, hammering hook to the other man’s ribs that – in the fraction of a second – created enough space for him to deck Johnson with an upper-cut, ala young Mike Tyson. Johnson kept his cool, returning fire with a powerful straight left. Dorris answered by giving Johnson another unprotected body blow. The two men faced each other with the last seconds ticking down. Johnson managed to graze Dorris with an uppercut. Dorris took the initiative at the end as he jumped in to finish with a bold, blistering left hook that echoed over the onlookers.

The judges’ score cards were unanimous in making Dorris a new triple champion.

“I didn’t know for sure until they announced it,” Dorris acknowledged. “You just can’t tell when you’re fighting a current champion, because judges want you to go above and beyond what a normal boxer needs to win a fight – they want you to prove to them that you won without a doubt.”

He added, “It felt like a thousand pounds lifted off my shoulders.”

Dorris explained that it’s hard for him to put into words what it meant to walk into the Folsom Community Center before the fight and see so many members of the Folsom Police Department, Folsom Fire Department and his own afterschool boxing program for Folsom teenagers, all eagerly there to cheer him on.

“It means a lot to me to see that support,” Dorris said. “Especially since this isn’t about me, it’s about what’s been going on in this nation lately with all of the negative outlook on law enforcement. I wanted to represent the Folsom Police Department in a way it could be proud of, not only from the way I was boxing, but from the way I carried myself and showed respect to my opponent.”