A drunk man wanted on a warrant was able to walk inside a school, slip past security guards and sit in on a couple minutes of class before students spotted him and alerted authorities.

"This person walked past the security kiosk, and that incident is being investigated by CSPD and our internal security department because we want to know how he passed it and got into the classroom," Academy School District 20 spokesperson Nanette Anderson said.

According to Anderson, the man never threatened or even spoke to anyone; he just quietly sat down at a desk in one of the classrooms at Pine Creek High School as though he belonged there.

"Some quick thinking by students in the classroom resulted in the man being detained," Anderson said. "Some students walked out, made a statement that they needed to go to the restroom or something like that, and walked out and notified security about it."

Five minutes after he first walked in, police say 35-year-old Kyle Raftery was detained.

"I look outside and I see a guy just getting arrested and there's like four cops around him...I think he was on something," student Ryan Carlos said.

Police say Raftery told them he was there on legitimate business, and that he wasn't planning to hurt anyone. No weapons were found when officers looked through his car, which was parked on campus.

However, police say Raftery appeared to be drunk.

Raferty was served with misdemeanor charges of trespassing and interfering with staff and students of an educational facility. He had an existing warrant for traffic violations, and was arrested for that.

The district says at every step of his misadventure, the suspect should have been stopped. When he walked into the school, a security guard posted at the front doors should have stopped him. For some reason, the suspect was able to walk right past the security station.

Even if he got into the school, he should have never made it into the classroom. Class was in session at 1:30 Friday afternoon, and all doors in the school except the front doors are locked during the school day. Yet somehow the man was able to get inside the classroom.

"If he got into a classroom that easily, he could have gotten into the office or anywhere, and it's a very scary situation to have your kids in that kind of situation," parent Jennifer Brown told 11 News.

Police and district officials will now be reviewing surveillance footage, which they hope will shed more light on how it happened. The district said they'll consider making changes to security policies after the investigation is complete.

School resumed as normal after the incident.

Here's the letter sent to parents:

At about 1:30 p.m., today, Jan. 16, an unknown male entered Pine Creek High School and proceeded to a classroom. He entered the classroom and sat down, did not talk to any students and did not threaten anyone. A student immediately notified security officers. When the man was approached by security officers, he appeared to be under the influence. He was detained by security officers and taken out of the building less than five minutes after he came in. Law enforcement officers were notified and it was discovered that the man had a warrant for his arrest.

Security and law enforcement officers searched the suspect’s car and performed a security sweep of the high school. Students proceeded through the rest of their scheduled classes this afternoon and all students and staff members are safe.

Pine Creek security officers will review security camera videos and are continuing their investigation into the incident.

Academy District 20 Chief of Security Brian Grady in addition to Colorado Springs Police are investigating today’s incident in which an unknown male entered Pine Creek High School. After the investigation is concluded, the district will make any recommended changes in procedures to improved security measures.