Between 1992 and 2006, 42.8 percent of U.S. counties had increased mortality rates among women.'

An independent national board dedicated to improving better health outcomes through evidence based research has called for a focus on women's health beyond gynecological and reproductive issues in its annual report to the U.S. Congress.

The report could be regarded as both a bold and necessary move to further advance health targets in the fight against chronic diseases, garner better outcomes in the fight against breast, cervical and ovarian cancers and to help women diagnosed with such cancers be better informed in their decisions for treatment.

Screening for breast cancer at what age and what treatment upon diagnosis has become a much debated issue.

In its report issued this month, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has identified five areas for "high priority" in terms of filling a gap for needed evidence-based research to improve its recommendations for meeting the medical and behavioral health needs of women.

These include addressing what is effective in screening women for issues of domestic violence, drug abuse, depression and suicide; thyroid dysfunction, something eight times more common in women; vitamin D deficiency that can play a role in bone health particularly as the body ages; for cancers of the ovary, cervix and in dense breasts; and how any recommendations can be best implemented in primary care practices.

"Although there are many important evidence gaps that affect other populations, addressing these notable unanswered questions in women's health has a broader population impact, and in so doing, can advance the health of the Nation," the report states.

"While women have traditionally enjoyed longer life expectancy and better health compared with men, this may be changing for the worse. Between 1992 and 2006, 42.8 percent of U.S. counties had increased mortality rates among women compared with only 3.2 percent among men. These increases were more common among non-Hispanic white women with less education living in the South and West. "

The report adds that such "growing disadvantage in women's health has implications not only for women but for their families as well."

"The Task Force makes evidence-based recommendations about clinical preventive services to improve the health of all Americans," the report says.

"However, significant evidence gaps in key areas of women's health limit the full realization of these population health benefits, and limit the Task Force's ability to make definitive, science-based recommendations."

The report notes that "improving the health of women and girls presents a unique set of challenges and opportunities for how we think about prevention and wellness in the clinical care setting."

The challenges include addressing what the report calls the "unique health care needs" of women and girls "related to reproductive and biological differences" as well as the recognition that female health concerns are impacted by home environment, economic and educational resources.

"The USPST recognizes the complexity of women's health and acknowledges the larger impact of preventive interventions on the health and well-being of women and girls," the report adds.

"For the purpose of this report, we take a broader view of women's health, focusing in particular on the prevention of diseases or conditions not related to pregnancy and reproductive health."

The USPSTF is mandated by the Affordable Care Act to make an annual report to Congress. Its 15 members serve four-year terms and are appointed by the director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality which was directed by Congress, in 1998, to create the USPTF. Their recommendations on screenings based on their review of existing , sometimes controversial, are made to primary care practitioners This is their fifth report to Congress.

The report explores in depth the various areas in which its says more evidence based research is needed for more informed recommendations and in terms of implementation includes the following response to the question, "How Can We Help More Women Talk to Their Doctors About Screening for Breast Cancer?"

"Mammography is an important tool in the fight against breast cancer. Evidence indicates that the value of mammography increases with age. Women ages 40 to 49 years should make their own decision whether to get a mammogram, in consultation with their clinicians. This decision should be based on their health history, family history, individual risk for breast cancer, and individual preferences," the report states.

"In addition, women who are at increased risk for the BRCA gene mutation that causes breast and ovarian cancer should be identified for genetic counseling, and women at high risk for breast cancer should consider medications to prevent breast cancer. However, these decisions are complex. Research is needed to develop tools that help women and their clinicians make decisions about screening that are consistent both with the best evidence and with women's values and preferences."

In 2014, the USPSTF focused on the evidence gaps related to the care of children and adolescents.