Passing judgment. I will give up my season tickets if Colin Kaepernick or Robert Griffin III is under center for the Broncos in the 2016 season. They are garbage. I have heard it all about Kap; he is trouble with a capital T. And RG3? Please. Really? Acquiring either quarterback would be the worst move by the Broncos since Josh McDaniels was hired as head coach. John Elway needs to trade up in the NFL draft and take Jared Goff of California or Carson Wentz of North Dakota State, while signing Harvard grad Ryan Fitzpatrick from the New York Jets as a stopgap.

Todd, a California cop

Kiz: We are crazy dreamers at Kickin’ It Headquarters. We think Kap could thrive under coach Gary Kubiak. But if Elway refused to overpay for Brock Osweiler in free agency, will the Broncos really push extra chips into the middle of the table when the trade ante for Kaepernick is raised by another NFL team? We do like your crazy dream. Sign Fitzpatrick for two years guaranteed, then ante a big stack of trade chips to draft Wentz, who was born to run the Denver offense. The problem? Denver probably would have to acquire the No. 2 pick to land Wentz. Making that deal would be very expensive, which is why this plan probably works better as a fantasy than in reality.

Benchmark move. I wondered if being benched for broken-down Peyton Manning made Osweiler think Elway had no confidence in him, with the long-term consequence being the departure of Oz to Houston?

Dave, Fort Collins

Kiz: Osweiler was good as gone from Denver on Jan. 3, when Kubiak replaced him during the third quarter against San Diego. Osweiler did not complain. He was a pro. But he also learned the hard way: The only genuine way a player can measure love in the pros is by money. The Texans loved him more.

Henry can help. C.J. Anderson is more replaceable than a trash bag. Draft tailback Derrick Henry from Alabama, and the Broncos would have an automatic upgrade on the cheap.

Brady, Duke alum

Kiz: The crack scouting department at Kickin’ It Headquarters already has advised Denver to consider Henry with its first-round draft choice. But we do love Anderson. No player sacrificed more personal stats in the silly hybrid offense operated for Manning’s benefit early in the season. From Nov. 22, when the Broncos finally started playing Kubiak ball with the insertion of Osweiler as a starter, through the Super Bowl, Anderson averaged 5.97 yards per carry, best in the NFL.

No. 7 still No. 1. And today’s parting shot took exception to my claim that Manning is the best quarterback ever to wear a Denver uniform:

You’re right, Kiz. Manning is the statistically greatest Broncos quarterback. And you’re the absolute worst columnist in Denver Post history.

N.C., loves No. 7