Topics: Editor's Picks, Media Criticism, Rick Perlstein, The Invisible Bridge, News, Politics News

Goldwater, Nixon, Reagan—Perlstein has moved from covering a minor saint, to a martyr, to God.

— David Weigel

Weigel’s summary goes to the heart of why Rick Perlstein’s latest book, “The Invisible Bridge,” has been received so differently from his first two histories of modern conservatism. It’s not that Perlstein has changed, but the stature of his subject matter most certainly has. Barry Goldwater had long been a neglected, if not a forgotten historical figure, and Perlstein’s sharply observed account of his turn at the apex of American politics earned wide praise from conservatives for exactly the same reason that his account of Reagan’s rise has earned such enmity. A bogus plagiarism charge was even mounted to not only muddy the waters, but to actually try to prevent publication of his work.

Because the shift in conservatives’ attitudes has been so dramatic, fewer have noticed how others have also shifted. Perlstein, understandably, has picked up on it.

“My stupidest reviews come from centrists desperate to cling to myth of a sensible right,” he tweeted on Dec. 15, linking to his response to a review by Jacob Weisberg in the journal Democracy. Weisberg, not incidentally, is working on his own Reagan biography, but there’s something much deeper than preemptive turf war tensions brewing between them. And when UC Berkeley economist/econoblogger Brad DeLong tweeted back, “OK, I will grant you Jacob Weinberg. Who else?,” Perlstein responded, “Sam Tanenhaus. Damon Linker [here] (he wasn’t all that bad). Robert Kaiser [here],” clearly indicating he had a body of reviews in mind. (When Salon spoke with him, Perlstein added Geoffrey Kabaservice and Michael Kimmage to the list.)

Perlstein’s got a point. Dispelling centrist and progressive myths about the right has been one of his key motivating factors as a historian from the beginning, and nobody really likes having their myths smashed to pieces—though some mind a lot more than others. However, Perlstein’s myth busting is not just to “expose conservative hypocrisy” or some related concern, as some have mistakenly supposed, but to get centrists and progressives to actually see what conservatives are doing, and why it’s not hypocritical in light of their worldview and values. “To beat conservatism, grasshopper, learn to think like a conservative,” Perlstein wrote in a blog post I’ll return to below. Thus, far from distorting his vision with respect to conservatism, as his centrist critics suppose, Perlstein’s political commitments fuel his motivation to be accurate, precise and insightful.

All this seems to go right over his critics’ heads, and indeed much of their criticism devolved into methodological griping—some of it sloppy to the point of being grievously inaccurate. At first Perlstein expressed a reluctance to respond, when Salon contacted him. “I’m hesitant to say too much because it’s kind of ungrateful to complain about reviews. I really am flattered and thrilled,” he began, echoing his opening remarks in the Atlantic, when he responded to its review by Sam Tanenhaus, titled “The Gonzo Historian.” But he did open up, though he repeatedly qualified his remarks. “I’m getting reviewed in the Atlantic. I’m on the bestseller list, getting to travel around and write books. It ain’t that raw. But I don’t think he’s helping advance an understanding of what’s going on in America.… I don’t think it’s helping our historical discussion.”

The root of such thinking is at least twofold: first, a belief in a left-right political spectrum in which both sides are mirror reflections of one another, and second, a belief in a “balanced” center that can somehow maintain its elevated position above the fray, untouched by the sordid realm it’s irrevocably embedded in—what longtime journalism critic Jay Rosen mockingly describes as ”the view from nowhere.” It’s a weird contradictory pair of assumptions, each questionable in its own right, but which combine so awkwardly as to discourage any critical self-reflection. It is, in fact, its own strange mythic worldview—a point we’ll return to below.

“These people who identify themselves as non-ideological, or post-partisan, or centrist, position themselves as not interested in ideology, but they’re perfectly obsessed with ideology, they’re just drenched in ideology, because they’re always weighing every utterance of themselves or others for bias,” Perlstein observed. “If you believe that there must be some abstract idea of left or right… you’re always going to be taking an ideological temperature, instead of just seeing the text, clearly, and evaluating it on an invention evidentiary basis.”

Hence the repeatedly bubbling-up assumption that any critical remark he makes about Reagan must implicitly be praise for liberals, whose faults he is blind to, right? Er, not so much. “I’m not very nice to liberals,” Perlstein noted. “One of my reviewers said that Carter [in this book] is almost like a con man. I don’t have too many heroes in these books. Maybe Martin Luther King, he’s pretty much the only one.”

The reason is fairly simple: He’s not that enamored with power. “What gets a little creepy with this is Reagan’s a winner, right? And I suspect a lot of these guys identify with a winner. They identify with power. And I see my role as standing outside of power and trying to understand it.”

As a result, Perlstein said, “It’s fascinating to me, it kind of reminds me of Lionel Trilling’s old jape about conservatives, that they don’t have any real ideas, they’re just irritable mental gestures that resemble ideas, so there’s really not a lot of–it’s very reactive.”

Turning back to the tweet, and the “myth of a sensible right,” if we focus on the American right itself, what Perlstein is pointing out must surely be true—if the right were “sensible,” as centrists and progressives generally understand the term, they’d have packed up shop following Goldwater’s defeat. Not being “sensible” in those terms is part of their defining core. The interesting question, then, is just what does that mean? How do different sorts of logic work? If one sort of logic applies to “sensible”/“reasonable politics,” then what sort of logic applies to “insensible”/“unreasonable politics”—and this instance of it in particular?

Two things must be noted right away: First, that Perlstein is talking about the American right collectively, not about any one individual in particular. The behavior he’s referring to is what we can observe about how the actually existing American right behaves in situation after situation—doubling down in opposition to any kind of gun safety legislation after Newtown, for example, or refusing to pass comprehensive immigration reform after losing the 2012 election—when all “reasonable” expectations point directly in the opposite direction. Particular individual conservatives who do act reasonably certainly exist, and if they’re prominent enough they get publicly disowned for their troubles, unless they choose and manage a more graceful exit. The above-mentioned Damon Linker, author of “The Theocons,” is one such individual, and like several others has come to be seen as more of a centrist (think John Dean or Kevin Phillips, though not Bruce Bartlett), though that’s not where he began.

Second, that there’s nothing necessarily wrong with a political movement being “unreasonable”—it depends on what they’re being unreasonable about. After all, the leaders of black slave rebellions such as Gabriel Prosser, Denmark Vessey and Nat Turner were surely unreasonable in their demands, and generations later, their unreasonableness triumphed. So merely noting that the American right is not sensible or reasonable does not automatically say nearly as much as some people seem to think about the subjects described; one must ask what they’re unreasonable about—and why. This is not an attempt to attack and slander, but to truly understand.

In his responses to Tanenhaus and Weisberg, Perlstein focused primarily on what they got wrong about his book descriptively—clearly demonstrable failures to accurately reflect the content they were commenting on. This is the most basic level on which a reviewer should be held to account. But his tweet points to a deeper argument that goes to the issue of overarching interpretation, and suggests a connection between the two—the constant ideological straining to assert the existence of a sensible right produces distorted readings of his work, with mundane sorts of careless misreading as one of its telltale consequences.

Of course, it’s one of centrism’s primary conceits that only those to its left or right are tainted by ideology, but just how the center escapes from the world of politics it’s in the center of—that, my friends, never gets explained. Instead, we get repeated displays of ideologically loaded assumptions—it’s just that the ideology involved is a centrist one. To show what I mean, here’s a passage from Weisberg’s review:

If he were willing to look more critically at the left, the way he does at the right, Perlstein might give more weight to the visible bridge of Reagan’s stated views. By the mid-1970s, the failures of Great Society liberalism were evident: Despite some popular and meaningful accomplishments like Medicaid, the poorly thought-out War on Poverty was arguably doing more harm than good. Broken welfare and public housing systems were not liberating the urban poor, but trapping a new underclass in a new kind of poverty. Crime, bad schools, and the threat of busing were driving the middle class away from America’s cities.

There are multiple problems with this passage, some of which can be illuminated by quoting from a March 2013 Perlstein blog post at the Nation on the Democrats’ internal ideological struggles, where he touches on this exact same period of time—along with references to other eras when related struggles raged. Because he’s not pre-committed to balancing powerful figures on “both sides” against one another, what he actually says completely escapes Weisberg’s mental universe, or at least so it would appear.

The end of the Vietnam War didn’t bring ideological unity back to the Democrats, Perlstein notes; rather “the first post-Vietnam election, post-Watergate, in 1974, inaugurated today’s order of battle between the right- and left-leaning wings of the party.” He writes that Reagan had warned that the influx of new Democrats elected that year—mostly from the suburbs–would lead to “a flood of expensive, spectacular, and ill-conceived legislation which can’t be derailed or even tempered by the voices of moderation,” but he turned out to be spectacularly wrong:

Thirty-six-year-old Gary Hart was more or less the ideologist of the bunch. His memoir of the McGovern presidential campaign, which he had managed two years earlier, called liberalism “near bankruptcy.”Time called him a “liberal.” “Traditional ‘liberal’ and ‘conservative’ slogans,” he wrote back in an angry letter to the editor, “are simply not adequate to cope.” He said the best way out of the energy crisis was “to work together. There will be a lot more cooperative ventures between the environmentalists and the energy developers.” His stock speech, “The End of the New Deal,” argued that his party was hamstrung by the very ideology that was supposed to be its glory—that “if there is a problem, create an agency and throw money at the problem.” It included lines that could have come from Commentary, the neoconservative magazine Jerry Brown, who was friends with Hart, liked to read and quote. Like: “The ballyhooed War on Poverty succeeded only in raising the expectations, but not the living conditions, of the poor.” (That was false: the poverty rate was 17.3 percent when LBJ’s Economic Opportunity Act was enacted in 1964 and 11.2 percent as Gary Hart spoke.)

What this passage shows is that a) Perlstein is quite aware of the complexities Weisberg alludes to, b) as well as the policy lies woven into Weisberg’s recitation of the conventional wisdom retrospective on the era, but that c) these complexities were playing out within the Democratic Party, not in the GOP, the primary locus of political developments chronicled in “The Invisible Bridge,” where d) that book’s primary protagonist utterly failed to see the complexities that Weisberg claims are fatally missing from his story; e) moreover the fact that ideological centrists like Hart and Brown were the “new blood” in the Democratic Party fundamentally contradicted Reagan’s portrayal of how the Democrats were relentlessly pulling the country leftward to its doom.

Bottom line: Perlstein shows that a nuanced picture of political history can coexist perfectly well with a simultaneous tale of stark ideological polarization in a polity as large and complicated as America’s. If anything, this brief description of what was happening with the Democrats makes Perlstein’s case even stronger, since it provides precisely the sort of rich complexity his critics claim that he lacks. Moreover, just because his extended book project recounts the multi-decade history of a dominant sociopolitical movement, that does not mean for a minute that he thinks it exhausts the history of the era—it is those like Weisberg and Tanenhaus and others who misread him who are guilty of this confusion, not Perlstein.

But that leaves undiscussed the precise nature of the unreasonable right as Perlstein understands it—and this is precisely where his critics ought to have focused their attention, had they not been ideologically so befuddled. Of course, the right is not unreasonable in its own terms—but that’s just the point. The problem that Perlstein is pointing to is not so much a problem with the right—as his centrist critics mistake him to be saying—it’s a problem with the rest of us not understanding the nature of the right, what it’s up to, and what constitutes reasonable behavior in light of what it is. The fullest answer to that comes from Perlstein’s book project itself, of course. But he’s dealt with it frequently in other venues as well, including two series of blog posts at the Nation from 2013. The first, in early 2013, ran under the banner “Nothing New Under the Wingnut Sun,” and it illustrated how key features of the conservative movement today have been around for decades, but it includes commentary on why those features came into being in the first place. The second series, under the banner “Thinking Like a Conservative,” takes us deeper inside conservative thought processes, illuminating the perspective from which their actions are not unreasonable at all.