Boys Basketball: Wingers fend off New Prague

Red WIng's Ty Buck takes a 3-point shot during the Wingers' 66-62 victory over New Prague on Saturday. Buck, who surpassed 1,000 career points during the game, made the shot and led Red Wing with 22 points and four assists. (Republican Eagle photo by Kyle Stevens)

During warmups, some members of the New Prague JV were buzzing about the reverse dunks and one-handed alley-oops that Red Wing was throwing down. When the game started, it was as if the 20 minutes of unobstructed shooting continued, but for the Trojans.

Like the final drill, where the starters and key reserves throw up jumpers from all over, New Prague had clean looks at the hoop. And through nine minutes, the Trojans weren’t missing. Four different New Prague players hit 3-pointers over that span, jumping out to an eight-point lead.

But the Wingers would not panic, settling into their offense and figuring out the Trojans’ sets to come away with a 66-62 non conference victory on Saturday.

“We anticipated it, and talked about it before the game,” said Red Wing head coach Doug Toivonen. “The same thing kind of happened on Thursday, a lot of penetration and kick. We just needed to do a better job of finding their shooters and, obviously, they shot really well at the beginning and at the end. Fortunately, in the middle, we played much better and had a chance to knock some shots down. And in the end, we had a 13-point lead, so when you give up 3-pointers at that point, you still maintain a big enough lead.”

Both teams started out hot, but six of New Prague’s first seven baskets were 3-pointers. And the one that wasn’t turned into three points when Ben Buthe converted an and-one.

But the Wingers figured things out over the final nine minutes of the first half, outscoring the Trojans 21-13 over that stretch. And that momentum carried over into the second half where the beginning of a 14-point run began with a stoppage in play. With two free throws five minutes into the half, Red Wing’s Ty Buck hit 1,000 career points. The senior Winger needed 13 points to hit the milestone, but pressing for it in the first half meant waiting for the moment longer than the fans expected.

“I was thinking about it in the first half, getting nervous and stuff,” Buck said. “But after I scored it, I set my mind winning the game. That’s all that matters. A thousand points doesn’t matter to me at all. I want my team to win and have a fun time this season.”

Buck scored 14 points in the second half, including those two free throws. And after a moment that saw Buck receive the game ball, high five his teammates, hug his coach and take a photo with his father, the Winers immediately set forth to put the game into the same history that Buck’s scoring prowess now sits.

Ben Munson hit two 3-pointers, and Ben Miller scored twice on easy layups thanks to an offense that had the Trojans scrambling to catch up. After the flurry, Red Wing went from down 36-34, to a 48-36 lead.

The Trojans, however, would not go away, hitting four 3-pointers over the final three minutes, including one at the buzzer. But the second-half surge from Red Wing was too much.

Buck had a game-high 22 points and team highs in assists (4) and steals (2). Travis Toivonen (12) and Munson (10) also hit double figures in points while Buck and Miller each had five rebounds.

Buthe had 20 points to lead the Trojans, including a perfect 3-for-3 from 3-point range. New Prague hit 11 of 21 3-pointers while Red Wing converted on just 4 of 12.

The Wingers held off two of three opponents over a three-game week, beating Austin and falling to Mankato East. It was a grind, but Red Wing (8-1) will get some free time to get some rest.

“We have some time off. We’re going to practice Monday and Tuesday, then we’ll have three days off in the middle, then we’ll practice Saturday and Monday. We have Kasson-Mantorville here on Tuesday. It will be nice to have four home games in a row. When you have three games in a week like this, that third game is draining, especially the games we played being as close as they were. These guys are playing a lot of minutes, so it will be nice to get these guys a bit of a break to recover and enjoy some time off before we hit Kasson and Stewartville and the second half of the year.”