People Moves of the Week: Clayton Dubilier Rice, Perella Weinberg, Moldaver Lee & Chrebet

Clayton Dubilier Rice hires Russell Fradin as operating partner; Perella Weinberg promotes five; Moldaver Lee & Chrebet joins Stifel

Byline Bank- The commercial services bank hired Jim Kuncl, Dan Delgadillo and Joe Horwath to start a new sponsor finance group that will focus on lending to private equity firms. The new hires are based in Chicago. Byline, located on Chicago,focuses on lower middle-market companies that have up to $10 million in Ebitda.

Clayton Dubilier & Rice- Russell Fradin will join the private equity firm in April 2016 as an operating partner. He was most recently the CEO of Sunguard Data Systems, which was recently acquired by Fidelity National Information Services Inc. (NYSE: FIS). The move comes as many private equity firms bring aboard executives with operational experience. For more, see Operating Partners Will Be More Important Than Ever and The Rise of the Operating Partner.

Greenberg Traurig LLP- The law firm hired Seth Zuckerman in its New Jersey office. Zuckerman, who was previously with Saiber LLC, focuses on M&A and spin-offs in the aerospace, manufacturing and insurance sectors.

Hunton & Williams LLP- Piyasena Perera has joined the law firm as a counsel in its Tokyo office. Perera, who was previously with Anderson Mori & Tomotsune, focuses on M&A and alternative investment transactions with Japanese companies. In addition, Kevin Felz, who was with Hunton since 2012, will join the firm’s infrastructure team in Tokyo.

Perella Weinberg Partners- The investment bank promoted Kevin Cofsky, Thomas Haines, Nicholas Johnston, Joseph Lacovara and Darren Myers to partner. Cofsky focuses on restructuring; Haines concentrates on M&A; Johnston focuses on M&A in the health care sector; Lacovara is Perella’s chief technology officer; and Myers is on the firm’s investment committee.

Moldaver, Lee & Chrebet Group- The wealth management group has combined with Stifel Financial Corp. (NYSE: SF) as part of Stifel’s acquisition of Barclays plc’ (LON: BARC) U.S. wealth and investment management division. Moldaver, which employs former New York Jets wide receiver Wayne Chrebet, will be based in New York.

- The next edition of People Moves will be published on Jan. 5.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: