A local investment group will place a second full-service emergency center in Greater Waco, this one to go up on the Interstate 35 frontage road near University Parks Drive, where the Magic China restaurant building will be demolished.

Dr. John Hamilton, who serves as medical director for Premier ER Plus at 9110 Jordan Lane in Woodway, said the new, privately operated facility likely will open in spring of 2016, after demolition and construction are complete.

“We felt that North Waco, the downtown area and the Baylor University area were being underserved for medical care, and that’s why this location was chosen,” said Hamilton, adding that the site on Interstate 35 will become home not only to a Premier ER Plus location but also a Premier Urgent Care clinic for treatment of minor illnesses and injuries.

Five to 10 investors who have formed a group called Caplin will build the medical complex near downtown. It will have five or six ER physicians, registered nurses, technicians, laboratory services and radiology capabilities that include CT, ultrasound and X-ray.

This same group underwrote the multimillion- dollar expense of placing a medical complex on a 1.8-acre site just off U.S. Highway 84 in Woodway. That site also features a Premier ER Plus and a Premier Urgent Care, the two occupying nearly 14,000 square feet.

John Hamilton said the new complex will employ about 50 people, and that he has begun recruiting ER doctors to serve it.

Investor Paul Hamilton, a spokesman for the group, said the emergency room and minor care center in Woodway are doing even better than initial projections and showing a profit since opening in August 2014.

John Hamilton said the two medical service providers attract between 50 and 60 patients daily.

“So many people have asked that we open a second, near downtown, that we decided to do just that,” Paul Hamilton said.

Chris McGowan, director of urban development at the Greater Waco Chamber of Commerce, applauded its arrival.

“I think it’s a great idea,” he said, speaking by phone from the chamber headquarters downtown. “This side of town is a little less served, in terms of medical services, but we have more and more people moving into the area.”

Critical care

John Hamilton said Premier ER Plus provides the type of critical care most people would associate with hospital emergency rooms. The staff treats patients suffering from heart attacks, strokes, pneumonia and other life-threatening conditions.

“We’re seeing exactly what we saw when we all worked in hospitals,” said John Hamilton, who left Providence Health Center and recruited several ER physicians from Providence to join him at the new private facility.

Premier ER Plus refers patients needing surgery to Providence and to Baylor Scott & White Hillcrest Medical Center. It accepts all commercial insurance, but can’t legally accept Medicare, Medicaid or Tricare insurance because it is not operated under the license or auspices of a hospital, John Hamilton said, “We wish we could accept those methods of payment.”

He said the emergency facility does have a cash option “that provides a significant discount to those who do not have insurance.”

Premier ER Plus likely will be treating less affluent patients at its new facility near downtown Waco, John Hamilton acknowledged, “But a large percentage of the population does have jobs and insurance. It’s not a matter of annual income.”

Waiting times

He said as access to medical care continues to increase because of the Affordable Care Act, which some have dubbed “Obamacare,” waiting times in emergency rooms likely will increase.

Privately run companies such as Premier ER Plus, where the average waiting time to be seen by a doctor is 10 minutes or fewer, can help reduce overcrowding, the doctor said.

“Additional service availability helps the Providences and Hillcrests, which provide specialty care,” he said, adding that the cost of services at Premier ER Plus is comparable or even less than that found at hospital-affiliated emergency rooms.

Magic China move

Magic China reportedly will close for business July 1, and demolition will begin shortly thereafter. The family that owns the popular eatery is pursuing another location, possibly near downtown or at Central Texas Marketplace.

The new Premier ER Plus will do business next to the old Texas Playhouse Theater building, which Dallas-based Leon Capital Group is transforming into a hamburger emporium called Twisted Root.