WHITE OAK — A forensic investigation of electronics seized from the home of a White Oak ISD employee could lead to charges being filed, police said Friday.

Gregg County Sheriff's Office and the White Oak Police Department served a search warrant Thursday afternoon at a Longview residence in connection with allegations that a White Oak school employee exchanged inappropriate text messages with a student.

White Oak Police Chief Terry Roach confirmed no arrests had been made and the investigation was ongoing.

"For now, we're going to wait until the forensic investigation (of the computers) is done," he said.

The search warrant states that the student told police a White Oak school employee sent her text messages of a sexual nature and an explicit photo — in addition to attempting to arrange a sexual encounter.

Another student also told police the employee sent him photographs of nude women about two years ago.

The News-Journal is not naming the suspect because no charges has been filed and no arrest has been made. According to a search warrant filed at 4:27 p.m. Thursday by White Oak police criminal investigator Lt. Ferris Ellis, police believe the suspect committed the crime of criminal solicitation of a minor.

Police searched a residence Thursday in the 600 block of Milligan Drive in Longview, seizing more than 20 computer, photo and memory storage devices.

On April 27, White Oak Chief Terry Roach directed Ellis to meet at the school after it was reported an employee sent inappropriate text messages.

Ellis was told a student had observed a screenshot of the messages on a friend's phone. Police then met with the employee, who allowed officers to inspect his phone.

Roach said there were 21 text messages on the phone, none matching the screenshot.

The employee told police he'd been having trouble receiving his text messages and recently had switched cellular providers. Before this, he said, there were "about four thousand messages" he had deleted, after being directed to do so by the phone company, police said.

According to the warrant, before meeting with the employee, officers were informed the messages may have been sent using the "Kik" application.

"During our conversation with (the employee), he was asked if he knew about 'kickin,' " Ellis stated. "(The employee) said he did not know what 'Kik' was."

Kik is an instant messager smartphone app, according to www.kik.com/press.

On April 28, the student who received the text messages was interviewed by the Child Advocacy Center in Longview; the teen said she was "friends on Instagram" with an individual she knew by name and identified as a school employee, reports say.

The student said on April 24 that she received a direct message on Instagram from the account asking whether she used Kik. When she responded that she did, the Instagram user provided her with his Kik account screen name.

"(The student) knew she was communicating with (the employee) because he is the only person she had given her Kik name to," Ellis said. "(The student) stated they communicated online through Kik until April 27."

According to the search warrant, during an April 24 text message exchange, the student told the employee she lived near a park. The employee said she could go there or he could pick the student up at her residence.

The next day, the student said the employee sent her a message saying he wanted her to perform a sex act on him. She said the employee also sent her an explicit image.

"She said (the employee) told her to delete the photo from the messages, and she complied," Ellis stated. "(The student) said that he asked her to delete the direct message he sent her on Instagram in which he asked for her Kik username."

The student also confirmed she sent screenshots of the conversation to a friend's cellphone.

According to the search warrant, the student told the interviewer the employee pulled her out of class and told her he had spoken with the police.

"(The student) said he told her he had spoken to the police. (She) said he told her to make sure he didn't get into trouble," Ellis said. "(The White Oak schools employee) later told her he would lose his job, that she needed to be on his side and come up with a story."

On May 7, as part of the department's investigation, Ellis said he spoke with a male White Oak High School student who said "approximately two years ago (the employee) sent him photographs of nude women using a Kik account."

The student told police he saw a Kik account on the employee's phone.