Nurse practitioner Jeannette Wade examines Dayveon Anderson, 23 months, as he sits with his mother, Erica Burns, in the emergency department at Aurora Sinai Medical Center. He was being checked for an allergic reaction. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE Dayveon Anderson, 23 months, peeks out from an exam room in the emergency department at Aurora Sinai Medical Center. Mark Hoffman

By of the

Hospitals have long struggled with the number of patients who seek care at emergency departments for sore throats, sinus infections, rashes and other medical conditions that could be treated in less costly settings.

Yet hospitals haven't opened urgent care clinics, which could treat many of those patients, next to their emergency departments.

Now a partnership between Aurora Health Care and Progressive Community Health Centers plans to do just that at Aurora Sinai Medical Center.

Earlier this month, Aurora announced the partnership and its commitment of $1.7 million to help Progressive open a clinic and an urgent care clinic at the hospital.

"I always thought it was an interesting model," said Jenni Sevenich, chief executive officer of Progressive Community Health Centers.

Aurora's commitment was part of its plans to give $10 million to community health centers and other organizations in eastern Wisconsin to improve access to primary and behavioral health care as well as treatment and prevention programs for sexual assault and domestic violence.

The planned clinics at Aurora Sinai will help address one of the gaps in Milwaukee's health care system: Access to primary care in low-income neighborhoods.

The partnership with Progressive also comes as health systems have reported sharp increases in the number of people seeking care at emergency departments as people have gained health insurance through the expansion of BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program, and through the Affordable Care Act.

"The need is great, and it is only getting greater," said Rachel Roller, Aurora's senior vice president of government and community relations.

The Congressional Budget Office estimates that people use 40% more health care services on average when they have insurance. Another estimate is people with health insurance use on average twice as many services as those who are uninsured.

At the same time, many of the people who have gained coverage this year live in neighborhoods with relatively few primary care physicians and other clinicians. People often seek care at emergency departments, particularly during evenings and weekends, because they can't get in to see a primary care physician or other clinician.

"It's the delivery system, not necessarily the patients, where the problem is," said Robert Berenson, a physician and expert in health policy at the Urban Institute.

An estimated 7% of visits to emergency departments were for non-urgent care and 32.7% were for semi-urgent care in 2010, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Those percentages are almost certain to increase now that more people have coverage.

Progressive's urgent care clinic initially will be open from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. Monday through Friday and will be next to the emergency department at Aurora Sinai.

"We all thought it was very important to have the urgent care next to the ED," Sevenich said.

Another clinic, which will have scheduled appointments, will be nearby on the Aurora Sinai campus.

Higher payments

The Zablocki Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Milwaukee also has an urgent care clinic down the hall from its emergency department. But the VA has a set budget. It doesn't generate more revenue when it provides care in an emergency department for patients who can be treated for less money elsewhere.

The opposite has been true for hospitals in the private sector.

Economics in all likelihood has played a part in why health systems haven't opened urgent care clinics with extended hours near hospital emergency departments.

Health systems receive much higher payments when they see a patient in an emergency department. Until last year, hospitals could even make money on some patients covered by Medicaid programs who received basic care at emergency departments.

Medicaid pays hospitals and doctors less than Medicare and far less than private health plans. But the program previously paid hospitals a set rate for outpatient services. The rate was the same for a patient who had same-day surgery to have a gallbladder removed as it was for a patient who was treated for a urinary tract infection at an emergency department.

On April 1, 2013, the state switched to a new system that reimburses hospitals for outpatient services based on the quantity and type of services they provide, according to Claire Smith, a spokeswoman for the Department of Health Services.

Aurora said the planned clinics at Aurora Sinai are not tied to the change in how Medicaid pays for outpatient services. But partnering with Progressive has an additional advantage.

Community health centers such as Progressive are located in low-income urban and rural areas and provide primary care, dental care and other services to patients who are covered by Medicaid programs, such as BadgerCare Plus, or who are uninsured.

The centers receive higher payments from Medicaid to offset the costs they incur for providing care to uninsured patients. Those patients pay fees on a sliding scale tied to their income.

In contrast, a study released this year by the federal Government Accountability Office found Medicaid payments for physicians in Wisconsin on average were 71% lower than private insurance for office visits.

The higher payments for community health centers means that Progressive can at least break even treating patients covered by Medicaid while Aurora would lose money if it operated the clinic.

Staffing costs

Aurora approached Progressive about opening the clinics about a year ago, said Sevenich, the community health center's chief executive.

She was intrigued but in the midst of building a new clinic that would replace Progressive's main clinic at 3522 W. Lisbon Ave.

The clinic — 42,000 square feet compared with 8,500 square feet at the existing clinic — is projected to cost $11.5 million. It is being financed partly by a $5 million federal grant from money allocated in the Affordable Care Act and a $2 million gift from Froedtert Health. It is scheduled to open in February.

Progressive wasn't in a position to take on another project. Nor would it be able to find the doctors to staff the clinic.

The community health center is working to hire three physicians for its Lisbon Avenue Health Center and its Hillside Family Health Center at 1452 N. 7th St., Sevenich said. Additional physicians and staff will be needed as its new clinic draws more patients.

Finding primary care physicians who want to work in low-income neighborhoods is a perpetual challenge for all of the community health centers, even with a federal program that will repay up to $50,000 in student loans in exchange for two years of service.

Aurora then proposed providing two primary care doctors and two nurse practitioners who would work for Progressive under contract at the Aurora Sinai clinics.

The health system also would help cover the cost of opening the clinics, which would be able to refer patients to specialists who work for Aurora.

"They really want us to be successful in every way," Sevenich said.

Progressive has applied for a $650,000 federal grant to help cover the cost of opening the clinics. It expects a decision in May.

Even without the grant, though, Aurora and Progressive plan to more forward.

"It is in the best interests of the community," said Roller, the Aurora senior vice president.