TALLAHASSEE – Like one in five Floridians, Martha Thew does not have health insurance.

The 59-year-old Melbourne woman lost her insurance last August when her terminally ill husband died and his disability payments stopped. Thew, who works part-time as a handywoman and sells artwork, said she could not afford the premiums, although she was getting her insurance through the federal exchange set up under the Affordable Care Act.

“They want more for my health insurance than what I make each month,” Thew said.

Yet, Thew, who is currently helping remodel a foreclosed house, makes too much to qualify for Medicaid, the federal-state health care program for low-income and disabled Floridians.

She is one of approximately 1 million Floridians whose health-care coverage is in the hands of the Florida Legislature. If lawmakers agree to expand Medicaid under the federal health-care law, Thew could gain coverage. But if lawmakers again balk at the expansion it will leave Thew and many others without a safety net.

Thew said she is in good health and has no immediate medical concerns. She also hopes to resume her coverage in the summer when she will begin receiving widow benefits. But she said she is concerned for others who may not have her options.

“It would be a godsend to a lot of people if they could do something to help us out,” Thew said. “I don’t like to ask for help really. So I’m just going without any health care insurance.

“There are a lot of people in worse shape than I am and they really need regular medical care. And they’re not getting it. The Legislature really ought to look at that.”

Medicaid expansion has emerged as a top issue in the 2015 session that began last week. Momentum has built for a serious debate, helped in part by a coalition of hospitals, health care providers and business groups – which all have a stake in reducing Florida’s 22 percent uninsured population.

But the real driving force has become the federal government’s threat to end at least a portion of a $2.2 billion a year program that helps Florida hospitals pay for the care of poor and uninsured patients. The so-called “low-income pool (LIP)” will end on June 30 unless the federal government revives it.

“Florida is at an important crossroads in the Medicaid program,” Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, said in a memorandum to senators on Thursday. “Nearly $2 billion of low income pool funding is in jeopardy.”

Like it did in 2013, the Senate will move ahead thist week with an alternative Medicaid expansion plan, Gardiner said.

“Some say Florida should not expand the existing Medicaid program and I agree,” Gardiner said. “But we have the obligation to make coverage affordable and the opportunity to develop a consumer-driven approach – one that provides access to high-quality, affordable health care coverage while promoting personal responsibility.”

House leaders, who rejected the Senate Medicaid plan in 2013, remain firmly opposed to any expansion plan, arguing there is no guarantee the federal government will support the expansion in future years.

“At this point in time, we're not interested in expanding Medicaid as we know it,” said House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island.

One option for dealing with the potential LIP shortfall would be to use part of the state’s budget surplus – estimated to be more than $1 billion in the coming year – to make up for the reduction in federal funding for the state hospitals.

But Gov. Rick Scott, who has said he would support a Medicaid expansion plan if fully funded by the federal government, issued a letter last week saying he would oppose the use of state funding to resolve the LIP problem.

That in turn prompted a response from Senate Appropriations Chairman Tom Lee, R-Brandon, that all spending initiatives –including more than $500 million in tax cuts and a historic boost in school funding sought by Scott – will not be included in the new state budget until the LIP issue is resolved.

“Until we get some clarity to this picture on how we are going address healthcare and unreimbursed care in the state of Florida, we are not going to be allocating large chunks of resources to any of the priorities, including individual member priorities,” Lee said.

House leaders say they will continue to build their budget proposal based on the assumption that the bulk of LIP funding will remain. “It’s early,” said Crisafulli about the state of negotiations over LIP and the state budget.

A key question is how much LIP funding is really in jeopardy.

In testimony before the Senate Health Policy Committee, Justin Senior, who oversees Florida’s Medicaid program and has been in direct negotiations with federal officials over the future of LIP, told senators it would be reasonable to assume “hundreds of millions” of dollars may be at stake.

“The federal government has definitely expressed to us a reluctance to continue to fund that portion of the low income pool that is associated with uncompensated care delivered to people that would be picked up in a Medicaid expansion,” Senior said.

Senior said state health officials have had trouble quantifying that number and he also said that LIP covers more than hospital care for the uninsured, including providing incentives for hospitals to treat the current Medicaid population, funding local initiatives like poison control centers and providing substantial support for state medical schools.

Senior said state health care officials remain hopeful that the federal government will continue to fund “the lion’s share” of the LIP.

Next week, the Senate Health Policy Committee will move ahead with its alternative Medicaid expansion plan (SB 7044) that would use federal funding to provide vouchers to consumers to purchase private insurance.

Like an expansion plan recently approved for Indiana, the Senate proposal would require consumers to pay a premium up to $25 a month for their coverage and a fee if they use emergency rooms. Additionally participants would have to show proof of employment, on-the-job training or pursuit of education to qualify for coverage.

Some advocates have already raised questions about requiring low-income Floridians to pay a premium for their coverage.

Leah Barber-Heinz, head of Florida CHAIN, a consumer health-care lobbying group, asked senators not to “put up too many barriers to care for the people we’re trying to help.”

“We’re always going to have some concerns about, for example, premiums which will be very difficult for low-wage workers,” Barber-Heinz said.

Thew, the Brevard County resident who currently has no health care insurance, said cost remains a critical factor for her.

“I couldn’t afford a whole lot. I would be able to pay something. I just can’t pay more than I make every month,” she said.

THE STORY SO FAR

Medicaid expansion has become a critical issue in the 2015 Legislature. Here is what is happening:

• Like all states, Florida has the option of expanding Medicaid, the federal-state health care program for the poor and disabled, under the federal Affordable Care Act.

• With opposition from the House, the Florida Legislature has rejected prior expansion plans.

• Expansion plans have been revived this spring following the federal government’s announcement that it was likely to end at least part of a $2.2 billion program that funds Florida hospitals for caring for the poor and uninsured.

• A Senate committee will take up a Medicaid expansion bill (SB 7044) next week. But its ultimate fate rests with the House, where leaders remain opposed to most expansion plans.