Waterbury Hospital had warned for weeks that layoffs were imminent after a deal fell through to sell the ailing hospital to a Texas chain, and, on Thursday, gave a first glimpse of its plans to cut costs.

The hospital said it will reduce its workforce by the equivalent of 80 full-time employees as part of a four-part plan to shore up finances. The decision affects full-time and part-time workers for a total of about 100 people, the hospital said. It would not say how many of those people will be laid off, or have their hours reduced, compared with open positions that will not be filled. The hospital said its workforce is 1,800 to 2,000 people.

The hospital's union representatives declined comment.

The hospital had warned it would be forced to cut expenses and reduce its workforce as a result of less revenues and government reimbursement. A plan to acquire the financially struggling hospital fell through last month when Tenet Healthcare Corp., a Dallas-based hospital chain, withdrew its offer. Gov. Dannel P. Malloy has since reached out to Tenet to restart negotiations.

Waterbury Hospital CEO and President Darlene Stromstad said in a statement: "Sadly, community hospitals across the state and country are facing enormous challenges from state and federal reimbursement cutbacks, the impact of healthcare reform, a changing marketplace, and healthcare services shifting to outpatient settings.

"These dynamics are especially difficult for hospitals like Waterbury Hospital which serve as a safety net hospital, caring for the most vulnerable patients and community members," Stromstad said.

In 2013, Waterbury Hospital had total operating revenue of $260.45 million and other revenue of $1.89 million. That year, the hospital reported an operating loss of $3.49 million. The company reported an operating profit of $201,923 in 2012, but had operating losses of $8 million in 2011 and $4.38 million in 2010.

The hospital is slashing expenses in four ways:

•Cutting the workforce by eliminating open positions and laying off full-time and part-time workers, in addition to reducing hours. A third of the jobs will be management, a third will be union workers, and a third will be nonunion employees.

•Eliminating and postponing initiatives that don't involve patients.

•Closing services such as community blood-draw stations; reducing some locations and hours of services; consolidating services and physician practices.

•Changing the hospital's operating structure, which could include outsourcing some functions or collaborating with other health systems.

The hospital continues to look for a health system that could acquire it.

"Many people worked tirelessly for countless hours and Waterbury Hospital spent millions of dollars to try and secure our future through a relationship with a strategic partner," Stromstad said. "Unfortunately, during the two-year period we had been working toward a transaction with Tenet Healthcare, reform and financial pressures accelerated and we must act now."

Seventy percent of Waterbury Hospital's clients are on Medicaid for low-income people or Medicare for people 65 and older. That coverage doesn't fully pay for the cost of patient care, the hospital said.

Low reimbursements from government plans along with reduced government reimbursements and other financial pressures have resulted in $9.77 million less in reimbursements expected this year than last year which means a reduction of almost 5 percent in revenue.

Tenet planned to acquire Waterbury Hospital until the company withdrew its applications last month in the face of state requirements that the company said were too restrictive. Malloy this week wrote a letter to Tenet inviting the company to reconsider. Tenet, a for-profit company, had plans to acquire five nonprofit hospitals in Connecticut, which requires regulatory approval.

Tenet has not commented on Malloy's invitation.

Stromstad said: "While we are encouraged by Governor Malloy reaching out to Tenet Healthcare for further discussions about re-engaging in the transaction with the Waterbury hospitals, we are taking action today to sustain this hospital's long-term viability — however painful this may be. We remain resolute in fulfilling our mission of caring for our patients and community, both today and for the future."

Tenet declined to comment on Waterbury Hospital's decision, deferring to the company's statements last month. In December, Tenet thanked hospital leaders and others for working with the company over two years, adding that the list of regulatory conditions imposed on the Waterbury Hospital transaction "led us to conclude that the approach to regulatory oversight in Connecticut would not enable Tenet to operate the hospitals successfully for the benefit of all stakeholders."