“Son of a *#$%! hamster!” exclaimed literally every member of Congress on Jan. 8, after President Obama vetoed the Restoring Americans’ Healthcare Freedom Reconciliation Act.

In a stunning turn of events, Obama shot down “the only bill we’ve put on the president’s desk in the past two years,” quipped House Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wisc.). What’s even more ridiculous is that this bill would have repealed Obamacare, in case you were wondering what Restoring American’s Healthcare Freedom Reconciliation meant. This is truly a mind-boggling feat, considering this marks the fiftieth-plus time that Congress has attempted to repeal Obamacare.

How could this happen? Congress is clearly firing on all cylinders – they’ve already put a bill on the president’s desk this year!… If there were ever a time for a heartfelt “Thanks, Obama,” this is it. Honestly, I don’t know how it is that we don’t have a healthcare system that actively hurts patients at this point. Restore my healthcare freedom, dammit!

Well, for better or worse, it happened: Obama vetoed an Obamacare repeal act. Who woulda thunk? But what does this mean for future repeal attempts? Is this still going to be a once in-a-blue-moon sort of thing, where Congress tries to repeal the same law 50+ times before finally passing a new bill? Couldn’t it just schedule a standing meeting, like, once a year for the president to veto its bill and just cut out the 535 middlemen? I guess at this rate, we would only need Congress twice a year or so. Now that’s an efficient use of tax dollars, if you ask me.

Or has this last big push finally garnered enough public attention to get steam next time, and has it done it so much that it’s influencing swing votes in the 2016 presidential election?

We don’t see a way that a Republican president wouldn’t repeal Obamacare – and as ridiculous as that sounds, is it really that much crazier than the current state of Congress?

It certainly wouldn’t be the first time that a tight Democratic primary aided a Republican candidate in the general election. And if you think Donald Trump is just too dumb for the job, keep in mind we re-elected George W. Bush after we “misunderestimated him.”

Whether Obama prolonged the inevitable or not, why is Congress so polarized – or dense – that it sent an Obamacare repeal to Obama, after he had promised, multiple times, to veto any such bill?