A financial plan for Medicaid expansion has received committee support. (Photo: File photo)

Together Louisiana called on Gov.-elect John Bel Edwards Monday to support Medicaid expansion that would provide health coverage to more than 240,000 people.

Together Louisiana is a grassroots organization of more than 200 religious congregations and civic organizations in 40 different cities across the state.

On Monday, 150 faith and community leaders with Together Louisiana held a news conference to announce a renewed grassroots push across the state to win health insurance coverage for uninsured residents.

Sunday Edwards told Gannett Louisiana he remains committed to accepting Medicaid expansion, but it may take longer than expected.

"I'm not moving away from expanding Medicaid, but we may have hurdles," Edwards conceded, also saying he must "make sure we have the revenue source identified and in place" to fund Louisiana's 10 percent match for the expansion.

"It's among my highest priorities," he said of the Medicaid expansion.

Gov. Bobby Jindal repeatedly refused to take billions in federal health care money to expand Louisiana's Medicaid program.

Thirty states have agreed to expand their Medicaid programs, with the federal government picking up most of the tab. But Louisiana has rejected the idea.

The Associated Press recently reported more than a dozen states that opted to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act have seen enrollments surge way beyond projections, raising concerns that the added costs will strain their budgets when federal aid is scaled back starting in two years.

Some lawmakers in these states warn the price of expanding the health care program for poor and lower-income Americans could mean less money available for other state services, including education.

In Kentucky, for example, enrollments during the 2014 fiscal year were more than double the number projected, with almost 311,000 newly eligible residents signing up. That's higher than what was initially predicted through 2021.

As a result, the state revised its Medicaid cost estimate from $33 million to $74 million for the 2017 fiscal year.

By 2021, those costs could climb to a projected $363 million.

Medicaid expansion would offer government-funded insurance coverage to adults making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level — less than $33,000 for a family of four.

Expansion supporters in Louisiana say it would extend health coverage to up to 240,000 people, like waitresses, hotel workers and people in minimum-wage jobs who can't afford insurance and whose employers don't offer it. They say it would help health care providers burdened with uninsured patients and lessen state costs for uninsured care.

Jindal has opposed the idea as too costly for the state and as an inappropriate expansion of government-funded health care.

“To become complacent on this issue, because we have a Governor-elect who is a strong supporter of Medicaid expansion, would be a fatal mistake,” said Rev. Lee T. Wesley, a leader with Together Louisiana. “Tennessee, Utah, Wyoming, Florida, Missouri, Virginia – all had governors who strongly supported Medicaid expansion. And had expansion blocked by their legislative bodies.”

Together Louisiana has been a leading voice in the state pushing for coverage for the uninsured and sees now as its best opportunity for action.

“For three years, we’ve left billions in federal funding on the table, while our Emergency Rooms have closed down and our people have suffered,” Wesley said. “We’ve got a message for our new governor and every newly elected member of our legislature. If you stand to expand Medicaid, the citizens of this state will stand behind you.”

Read or Share this story: http://tnsne.ws/1jgGGvL