Stock market update:

Stocks closed lower today due to more worries about the political climate in the Ukraine. The Dow Jones industrial average finished down 43.22 points to 16,065.67, the Standard & Poor's 500 index dropped 5.21 points to 1,841.13 and the Nasdaq composite index fell 15.02 points to 4,245,40. (CNN Money)

Growing tension between the West and Russia ahead of Ukraine's weekend referendum in Crimea pushed down stocks on major world markets today and drove up buying of safe-haven gold and the yen. (Reuters)

Treasuries posted the biggest weekly gain in almost two years as unrest in the Ukraine drove investors to the safety of U.S. government debt. (Bloomberg News)

Business news:

Sandwich chain Quiznos filed for pre-packaged bankruptcy protection today after struggling with high debt and stiff competition for years. (Reuters)

Target's security team reviewed -- and ignored -- urgent warnings from threat-detection tool about unknown malware spotted on the network. (InformationWeek)

Insurers participating in the Affordable Care Act must cover same-sex married couples as families, the government said. ( Bloomberg Businessweek

Tesla Motors CEO Elon Musk took to the Internet today to protest a New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission order to shut down the electric car manufacturer's direct sales in the state, saying the decision was little more that a "backroom deal" that circumvented the legislative process to protect the auto dealerships. (CNBC News)

Consumer confidence in the U.S. unexpectedly dropped in March to a four-month low, indicating household spending may be slow to pick up from a weather-related setback earlier this year. (Bloomberg News)

The FDIC has sued 16 banks for allegedly manipulating the London interbank offered rate. (BBC News)

Sprint is boosting its prepaid wireless service with the new, albeit uncreatively named, Sprint Prepaid. (PCMag.com)

Liberty Media abandoned its bid for full control of Sirius XM Holdings and laid out a plan to help fund Charter Communications' expansion. (Bloomberg News)

Web hosting company The GoDaddy Group is preparing for a second run at an initial public offering as the 2014 tech IPO pipeline continues to grow. (Reuters)

Facebook, Twitter and Microsoft have joined the list of Web companies that meet five out of five best practices for encryption as recommended by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. (SiliconBeat)

World business news:

The search for the missing Malaysia Airlines jetliner is focusing on two widely separated quadrants, one in the Malacca Straits off the west coast of Malaysia and the other hundreds of miles away in the northern Bay of Bengal. (ABC News)

European Union governments are set to sidestep Russian business and focus sanctions on individuals with a political involvement in the seizure of Crimea. (Bloomberg News)

Venezuela's annual inflation rate rose to 57.3 percent in February, the central bank said today, as violent opposition demonstrations during the month disrupted the economy. (Reuters)

Corporate activity at an international level has resulted in the disappearance of Hitachi Power Africa, which was controversially associated with the African National Congress's Chancellor House, and the emergence of Mitsubishi Hitachi Power Systems Africa, which launched at the beginning of March. (MiningWeekly.com)