When Gary McCormack of Loveland learned that his wife, Phyllis, needed a new kidney, he pulled out a restaurant napkin and started brainstorming with her.

"He told me to concentrate on keeping yourself healthy, and I'll find you a kidney," said Phyllis McCormack, who as a regular exerciser walked five miles a day until her surgery on May 15. "He was my kidney finder. He was my PR guy."

The McCormacks, both 75, brainstormed ways to find a live donor for Phyllis McCormack, who in February 2013 was told she was in stage 4 of kidney failure, caused by her lifelong condition of hereditary polycystic kidney disease, something she learned she had 35 years ago.

Polycystic kidney disease, which killed her mother and other members of her family, caused dozens of benign cysts to form on her kidneys, enlarging them over time and rendering them defunct. With a new kidney, the disease will remain but will not attack the transplant, she said.

In August 2013, Phyllis McCormack was interviewed by the transplant team at the University of Colorado Hospital Denver Anschutz Outpatient Pavilion and told she needed to get on the waiting list for a new kidney.

"How the hell do we find a kidney?" Phyllis McCormack said about their brainstorming session. "We were writing down ideas as fast as they came to us."

Finding a Donor

Advertisement

Their ideas centered on finding a living donor, something they were able to do within nine months, avoiding having to put Phyllis McCormack on dialysis. Now, Gary McCormack, who retired from working in marketing for Hewlett-Packard, wants to guide others through the process he went through with his wife.

"You've got to get up on your feet and find a kidney," Gary McCormack said.

The day of the napkin list, the transplant team had advised Phyllis McCormack to get on the United Network for Organ Sharing list to find a cadaver kidney, which would require a three- to five-year wait time with 115,000 people already needing one. The team informed her that finding a living donor would be optimal to speed up the process, though being on the list is required either way, Phyllis McCormack said.

"We decided to go with a live kidney, because, number one, they're more successful. They last longer," Phyllis McCormack said. "And the transplant is easier."

Following their discussion, Gary McCormack got to work right away, putting posters around town and messages in church bulletins about his wife needing a kidney. He wore a black T-shirt with white lettering every day until April 2014 when the McCormacks found a donor.

The T-shirt said "Kidney Needed Save a Life" and included a phone number to be tested as a potential donor.

"The goal of it was to have people ask, "What's your T-shirt?'" Gary McCormack said.

Gary McCormack would then explain about his wife needing a live donor, which is a relative or healthy person matched by blood type, tissue and antigens. He and their daughters weren't matches, so they had to find someone else to be Phyllis McCormack's donor.

Only one kidney is necessary in a transplant, and the kidney in the donor's body will grow larger and function for both kidneys. The kidney filters out fluids and waste that accumulate in the body.

The Final Donor

The McCormacks landed a spot on a Denver news station, and 174 people responded to their plea from the broadcast and their other efforts.

"We never, ever expected that many," Gary McCormack said.

Three potential donors were perfect matches, and one donor, who wants to remain anonymous, was nearly a perfect match and could have been Phyllis McCormack's sister, Gary McCormack said.

"She's a beautiful, loving woman," Phyllis McCormack said.

The transplant team asked the McCormacks to put together a program to help others find live donors, and the two are working out the details. They are connecting with the donors who wanted to help them to ask if they would consider donating to someone else.

Their program will include outreach, travel and education about the benefits of a live kidney and how to locate one.

"For years, I was silent about it," Phyllis McCormack said. "It's hard for me to say something was wrong and I needed help from someone else."

If interested in learning more about the McCormacks' work on finding live donors, call Gary McCormack at 667-7841.

"You need to be prepared to go to work," he said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.