The GOP still has no idea what a health care victory looks like. The reason the party fails over and over again is Republican health plans are the policy equivalent of what the tech industry calls vaporware—products that are perpetually in development, and are sometimes even previewed or demonstrated, but never quite make it to market. This is the way it always is for Republicans and health policy: a handful of options but no consensus—and the real plan, whatever it turns out to be, is coming soon, but not yet.

Regardless of how the Supreme Court decides this month on King v. Burwell, which challenges the legality of the administration’s decision to allow private insurance subsidies in federally run exchanges, what the episode reveals, yet again, is the Republican party’s historic failure to truly engage with the difficult realities and trade-offs of health policy—and how that failure has crippled the party’s ability to respond even when faced with events like big Supreme Court decisions that should force them to come up with an actual plan.

Story Continued Below

It may be that the Court rules against the administration, and perhaps even that Republicans manage to capitalize on the moment politically.

But in another sense, Republicans have already lost, because when it comes to larger health policy goals, the party effectively doesn’t have any beyond the repeal of the Obamacare. In the long term, Republicans can't win this fight because they don't know what winning means.

For years, Republicans have promised in no uncertain terms that an Obamacare replacement was just around the corner. “We want to repeal today so that we can begin to replace tomorrow,” Rep. Joe Barton (R-Texas) said in January, 2011, after Republicans took back the House and voted on the first of what would eventually become at least 40 of votes to repeal the health law. The votes helped keep the party’s Obamacare opposition in the news, but practically speaking they were largely theatrical; even if a repeal bill somehow passed in the Senate, it would always be doomed thanks to President Obama’s veto.

“Repeal means paving the way for better solutions that will lower the cost without destroying jobs or bankrupting our government,” said Speaker John Boehner when Republicans took control of the House. Multiple committees were tasked with drawing up replacement options, and they promised to be quick about their work. “We expect them to act in an efficient way,” said Boehner. But those better solutions never materialized—even when the party was given a prime opportunity to do so.

The following year, as a case challenging the constitutionality of Obamacare’s individual mandate made its way to the Supreme Court, Republicans once again promised that a replacement plan was on the way.

"We will be ready to respond to the Supreme Court decision, which is expected in June, with a replacement package," Rep. Joe Pitts (R-Pa.), head of the Energy and Commerce Committee promised in January, 2012. The Supreme Court’s big ruling arrived, but the promised replacements remained somewhere over the horizon, just out of sight. Meanwhile, Republicans kept voting—and voting and voting and voting—to repeal the law.

Now, with the King decision about to land, Republicans are still promising that a replacement plan is imminent. In the months since the Court announced that it would take the case, Republicans, who have generally supported the challengers, have repeatedly claimed that they would be ready should the administration lose.

Initially it looked at least possible that some sort of plan might be in the works. But as the months dragged on, it’s become clear that nothing has changed.

In March, Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wisc.), the Republican Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, promised that he would have a bill ready and scored by the Congressional Budget Office by late June when the decision arrived. “We have to be prepared, by the time the ruling comes, to have something. Not months later,” he said. Yet when Ryan finally unveiled the outlines of a plan last Wednesday, he provided few details, and no legislation or CBO score.

The story is similar in the Senate. In March, GOP senators John Barasso, Lamar Alexander and Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) announced in The Washington Post that they were ready with “a plan to create a bridge away from Obamacare.” The workings of the plan had been widely discussed, the op-ed declared, and “there is a great deal of consensus on how to proceed.”

But after a briefing for Republican Senators last week, two other Republican Senators—Lindsey Graham and John Cornyn—said flatly that there was no consensus about what to do. A separate plan from Sen. Ron Johnson seemed to be gaining steam, but no one knew for sure whether it could pass. Even if the Senate GOP had come to an agreement, there was no sense of whether it could reconcile its likely differences with any potential House plan. The trio behind the Post op-ed, two of whom led the Senate briefing, were reduced to insisting that upper chamber Republicans had considered multiple options and were still working their way to a solution.

***

The GOP’s failure to engage proactively with health policy has become more apparent in the Obama era, as the Affordable Care Act has taken hold, but it goes back long before that. Its modern incarnation arguably starts with the collapse of the Clinton health care plan in the early 90s.

What Republicans learned from the defeat of the Clinton plan was that they could win health care debates by refusing to provide an alternative. An enormously influential 1993 memo from Bill Kristol cautioned Republicans to avoid the temptation to “[help] the president ‘do something’” on health care, which would only lend credence to the Democratic idea that the system was broken. Instead, Kristol advised Republicans to question reforms that would upset a system with which a majority of the middle class was already satisfied, and to concentrate on tweaking the system as it already existed.

The result was that many Republicans in Congress walked away under the impression that the American health care system was largely fine, and that doing something to significantly redirect it would only serve the other party’s interests. And so in the decade and a half after the collapse of the Clinton plan, Republicans, on the whole, were largely content to ignore health policy.