On Thursday, Penn Highlands Healthcare officials said nearly 50 layoffs at hospitals in DuBois and Brookville this week likely represent the last in a push to cut costs and offset falling revenue system-wide.

The cuts formally announced on Thursday include 33 terminations, hour reductions for 13 staff and 90 positions lost to attrition at the DuBois branch alone. Meanwhile, the Brookville campus reported 15 terminations, nine hour reductions and 11 positions lost to attrition.

The announcement comes on the heels of recent layoffs at Penn Highlands facilities in Clearfield and St. Marys officials say were also meant to “right-size facilities in the wake of reduced inpatient volumes and decreased revenue.”

They included 28 layoffs, hour reductions for 25 staff and 15 jobs eliminated through attrition at the organization’s Johnsonburg Road, St. Marys facility, known as Penn Highlands Elk or Elk Regional Health Center prior to a 2013 cost-driven merger.

The positions impacted at all four merged Penn Highlands branches consist of full- and part-time clinical, support and management positions. The move is said to be an outcome of a 2015-16 strategic planning process and system-wide restructuring.

Spokespeople are calling the latest round of cuts, “the last phase” in that process, saying the organization now plans to instead move forward with widespread service realignments.

It is welcome news for Penn Highlands employees, including those in Elk County, concerned about the prospect of more job cuts after years of falling profits tied to lower patient numbers and shrinking reimbursements from government and private insurers. As a result, multi-million dollar operating losses have been reported at many of the health system’s area campuses in recent years. Officials expect the recent workforce scalebacks to largely offset the shortfalls.

But those same officials said future workforce adjustments can’t be entirely ruled out given a “changing health care landscape” brought on in part by changes enacted with the President’s Affordable Care Act, the reform law dubbed Obamacare by its critics.

A statement issued by Penn Highlands said the current workforce cuts are designed to help position the organization for those changes and “the future in a rapidly changing health care environment that is negatively affecting hospital and health system bottom lines nationwide.”

Earlier attempts to reduce branch costs and continued financial losses, including a 2014 hiring freeze, were reportedly insufficient, helping to force the layoffs and cutbacks now seen.

“While this is an outcome no one wants, reducing staff to match patient activity and national staffing trends is necessary for the long-term health and strength of our hospitals,” John Sutika, president of Penn Highlands DuBois said.

“Not taking such essential action would be irresponsible and would represent a real threat to the continuation of health care services in our region.”