SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

It’s official. Nicolle Wallace, who enhanced her profile after 2008 while bashing former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin on MSNBC to make up for Wallace’s shortcomings as a political adviser, and liberal actress Rosie Perez, the pro-Obama advocate who trashed Mitt Romney in 2012 and accused Rudy Giuliani of “incompetence” on 9/11, are the new co-hosts on The View.

As Breitbart News has previously reported, “during previous appearances on the show,” Wallace “gushed over Bill Clinton, Chris Christie, and Jeb Bush, while trashing Palin and conservatives,” continuing her trend of throwing conservatives under the bus to get patted on the head by the elite media after she and Steve Schmidt disastrously torpedoed John McCain’s 2008 presidential campaign with their terrible tactics:

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

In 2008, when McCain campaign consultants, namely Wallace and Steve Schmidt, decided to go “all-in” and suspend McCain’s campaign during the financial crisis, McCain’s poll numbers plummeted. Immediately thereafter, Schmidt and Wallace blamed the campaign’s downfall on Palin–whose vice presidential selection put the moribund campaign in the lead–to save their own reputations. Wallace was so “loyal” in 2008 that she did not even vote for the McCain-Palin ticket on election night. “I didn’t, I didn’t,” she told The New York Times. “And I was fine with that.” She claimed she never received her absentee ballot. Wallace soon discovered that the more she bashed conservatives and Palin on programs like Morning Joe, the more the mainstream media wanted to use her.

As has also been reported, co-host Rosie O’Donnell, a nasty 9/11 truther with a past history of blatant racism, “did not want the Republican co-host to be too confrontational.”

As Breitbart News previously noted, “enter Wallace, the show’s Brooklyn Brawler,” who “will be the lapdog who praises liberal Republicans the mainstream media love, while taking cheap shots at conservatives to please her producers and co-hosts.” The show’s producers may “be thrilled to exploit her as their useful Republican. But don’t expect the uninspiring Wallace to get the show out of its ratings slump.”

As for Perez, Newsbusters noted that she campaigned for Obama, sneered at Mitt Romney, praised Al Sharpton, and even accused former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani of “incompetence” on 9/11 that led to the death of firefighters.

Welcome to The View.