In a significant shift for the TV business, broadcasters have reached agreements with a major media buyer to change how audiences for their shows are counted, so that more time-shifted viewing is included.

Multiple broadcasters have reached pacts with ad-buyer GroupM to do prime-time entertainment deals based on seven days of commercial viewing after shows air, a system known as “C7,” people familiar with the matter say. Under the current “C3″ model, which has been the industry standard for several years, advertisers pay based on three days of commercial viewing.

The agreement to shift to C7 with GroupM comes as networks are preparing to strike “upfront” deals with advertisers for the TV season that starts in September.

TV networks have been pushing to switch over to C7, arguing that viewers are increasingly watching shows later on DVR and video-on-demand. Some advertisers, who are essentially getting ads viewed after the third day for free, have resisted moving away from the “C3″ industry standard.

The move by GroupM, a unit of WPP PLC, marks a major shift. It is the same firm that in 2007 effectively shifted the currency for TV negotiations from live ratings to C3 with a multi-million dollar deal. Citing data from the research firm RECMA, GroupM says it represents 25% of the U.S. TV ad market. Whether or not the entire ad market will follow GroupM’s lead, as it did in 2007, remains to be seen

“Fox has an agreement with a major agency to do deals on C7,” as part of its upfront negotiation with advertisers, said a spokeswoman for Fox, who declined to name which ad-buying firm.

(21st Century Fox and Wall Street Journal-owner News Corp were part of the same company until last year.)

Industry experts have predicted that TV networks would have to offer discounts on ad pricing as a carrot to convince media buyers to strike C7 deals. Indeed, as part of the agreements with broadcasters, GroupM’s clients will be given a discount on the prices they pay for ad time in this upfront, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Fox pushed the idea during its upfront presentation to advertisers last month. “In order for us to continue to make massive investments into our quality entertainment programming, we need to recognize the evolution of the media landscape and with so much of our audience choosing to watch on their own schedule, our business needs to evolve as well,” said Toby Byrne, Fox’s ad sales chief. “I think you can see where I’m going… for our business today and for tomorrow, we need to have a meaningful discussion about C7.”

Media companies have been trying for several years to move to C7. Fox did do some C7 deals last year. CBS chief executive Les Moonves has also long called for the change.

“C3 measurement was a stop gap to acknowledge that the world has changed,” he said at a conference in 2012. “And guess what, the world is changing even more rapidly because of the C7.”

“Ultimately I do see the business going onto a C7 metric,” Rino Scanzoni, chief investment officer at GroupM, told the Journal in May. “It’s a matter of working out the economics initially to make the transition one that’s acceptable to both sides.”

GroupM did not respond to requests for comment on Tuesday.

The move toward C7 could be a victory for broadcasters in a year when spending commitments are expected to be lackluster. Magna Global, a research and ad-buying unit of Interpublic Group of Cos., predicts that ad spending deals for broadcast networks are expected to drop by 2%-3% while money to cable channels could rise 4%-5%.