Topics: From the Wires, News

JERUSALEM (AP) — Israeli soldiers arrested over 40 Palestinians in an overnight raid Tuesday, while the government imposed new punishments on Hamas prisoners as the search continues for three missing Israeli teens who Israel believes Hamas operatives abducted in the West Bank.

Tuesday’s arrests brought the total number of Palestinians detained since the teens disappeared Thursday to over 200, most of them Hamas activists, the biggest West Bank crackdown on the militant group in almost a decade. Israel has vowed to exact a heavy price from Hamas, saying the aim of the military operation goes beyond searching for the boys.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu convened his Security Cabinet, a group of senior government ministers, to discuss the crisis. During the three-hour meeting, the ministers agreed to worsen the conditions of Hamas prisoners Israel is holding, said an official familiar with the deliberations.

He would not elaborate, saying only that the operation to return the missing teens “continues and will be intensified.” He spoke on condition of anonymity because the meeting was held behind closed doors.

The crisis has exacerbated already tense relations between Israel and the Palestinian government following the recent collapse of peace talks. Netanyahu has used the abduction to try to discredit Western-backed Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and the unity government Abbas formed with Hamas backing earlier this month. Israel has blamed Hamas for the apparent abductions, though it has not provided proof.

Netanyahu has expressed disappointment with what he considers to be a tepid international response to the kidnappings.

On Tuesday, he called on the international community to condemn Hamas, to support Israel’s right to defend itself and to press Abbas “to end his pact with Hamas.”

“Anybody who supports peace must tell the Palestinian Authority that they cannot build a government that is backed by the kidnappers of children and the murderers of innocents,” Netanyahu said at a meeting with international Mideast envoy Tony Blair.

Abbas formed the unity government early this month to end a seven-year rift with Hamas. The Cabinet consists of Abbas loyalists, but Hamas has agreed to support it from the outside.

Tuesday’s arrests took place around the northern West Bank city of Nablus, far from the southern city of Hebron, which has been the focus of the army’s search so far. Israeli forces continued to restrict the movement of Palestinians around Hebron.

The army said it found hundreds of weapons and explosives in Nablus. It posted photos online of bullets, grenades, guns and other weapons it said it found.