Republicans say the administration was trying to hide the prices. | REUTERS ACA site official had role in Medicare rollout

Henry Chao, the CMS official cited by Obamacare contractors as making key tech decisions behind the website rollout, was also responsible for much of the technology behind the troubled launch of the Medicare prescription drug benefit.

He “successfully managed the timely implementation of 10 major Part D systems, which facilitated the enrollment of 29 million beneficiaries into the Prescription Drug Program,” according to his official CMS bio.

Story Continued Below

Democrats find hope in the saga of the 2005 debut of the Medicare drug program enrollment system. Its launch too was very rocky but it got sorted out and is now viewed as a smashing success. Be patient, they say.

( See POLITICO's full Obamacare coverage)

But relying on the same technology official in two botched rollouts has raised questions even among some supporters of the Obama administration.

“It’s hard to look at his Medicare track record and have confidence that he was going to design a terrific e-commerce site,” said Bob Kocher, a former health care adviser to President Barack Obama who worked with Chao and is now a partner at Venrock, a Silicon Valley venture capital firm. “It’s the same guy.”

Chao in an email referred questions to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Systems press office. Neither CMS nor HHS responded to requests for comment.

In nearly 20 years at CMS, Chao has seldom been in the limelight - the exception being his attention-getting comment at an insurance industry conference last March when he said his goal for Obamacare online enrollment was “Let’s just make sure it’s not a third-world experience.”

( PODCAST: Questioning Obamacare glitches - who knew what, when?)

Website contractors testifying at the House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing on Thursday identified him as their key contact, and one who made crucial decisions.

At the hearing Thursday, Cheryl Campbell, a senior vice president at CGI Federal, the lead contractor designing HealthCare.gov, said she believed Chao made the decision – disastrous in hindsight – to turn off a feature that would have allowed people to “window shop” for health plans without creating an account first. That change contributed to the bottleneck that has been the most glaring problem in the first weeks of the Obamacare launch.

Republicans say the administration was trying to hide the prices. Prices would be lower for people who get subsidies.

In addition to his central role at CMS, Reuters reported that Chao is no stranger to the White House, having visited 36 times from November 2009 to May 2012, according to visitor logs. His exact role was unknown although a source who worked on health law implementation told POLITICO he gave monthly updates to the White House health reform team. The source gave no further information about those sessions.

( PHOTOS: 10 Sebelius quotes about the Obamacare website)

Chao joined CMS in 1994 ,and worked on Medicaid, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act implementation, and Medicare Part D.

His current job is deputy chief information officer at CMS under Chief CIO Tony Trenkle. They are in charge of planning and administering the IT infrastructure at the agency. His agency bio says he has also been lead information officer at the office in charge of implementing the health care law.

On Wednesday, Energy and Commerce Committee Democrats circulated a memo describing the initial reaction to Part D. Parts sound as though they could have been written today about HealthCare.gov, with a few adjustments.

“[Seniors] logged onto www.medicare.gov, they called Medicare’s information hot line …, and they waited. And they waited. And waited,” reads a USA Today story from December 2005, three months after enrollment began for Part D. “Medicare’s computer servers were overwhelmed by the traffic …. And since the phone counselors at the federal agency and at state and local call centers around the nation all use the same Web site, they weren’t as much help as they should have been either.…Information on some plans was incomplete, and people sometimes found themselves referred to other sources to get the information they needed.”

( PHOTOS: Obamacare online glitches: 25 great quotes)

In July 2013, Chao testified at a House subcommittee hearing on privacy concerns with the Obamacare application process and general readiness of the systems ahead of the planned Oct. 1 launch.

Sitting next to CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner, Chao may have foreshadowed the problems. Asked about testing of the Obamacare site, Chao hinted at the lack of start-to-finish testing. Contractors at Thursday’s House panel hearing talked a lot about the shortcomings of testing.

“Some folks like to use the term end –to-end testing, as if there is one giant thread from start to finish in of all these complex processes that have to in essence, have a handshake, to move this data and respond to data in order to fulfill the request for enrollment,” he said. He said CMS would test segments or “hops” of the whole chain, including the connection between the IRS and the data hub, the data hub and the marketplace, and the marketplace and insurance companies.” But the contractors noted the whole intricate system was never tested from end to end.