By Arthur Kane | Watchdog.org

With tens of millions of dollars spent on influencing Colorado legislators each year, lobbyists apparently are good at killing legislation but not nearly as proficient at passing bills, a Watchdog.org analysis of 2015 lobbying and legislation results found.

Off 133 bills in which more lobbyists indicated support than opposition, 92 failed to make it into law, giving lobbyist-supported bills a 31 percent success rate.

But of 116 bills that had more lobbyist opposition than support, 85 percent – or 99 bills – died in committee, on the House or Senate floor or were vetoed by the governor.

Michael Beasley, one of the Capitol’s top-earning lobbyists and a former lobbyist for Gov. Bill Owens, said the process is set up to kill legislation.

“It is much more difficult to pass a bill than to kill it,” said Beasley, president of 5280 Strategies, LLC. “It’s just a fact, and it’s probably a good thing. This process is designed to scrutinize ideas before they become law in Colorado.”

What’s tougher to explain is why lobbyists are worse at passing bills than average. This session bills that passed and those that died were nearly evenly split — 47 percent became law and 53 percent died somewhere along the process, according to a database from legislative staff tracking bill outcomes.

Colorado State University political science professor John Straayer theorized that bills with heavy lobbying were more controversial and therefore much harder to get through the system.

“I just think in general the institutional structure and process is built to stop more stuff than to pass stuff,” said Straayer, whose students often analyze the lobbying disclosures for his class. “In a committee, you only deal with five, seven, nine or 11 members, and on the floor it only takes turning three or four members to stop it. If there’s a lot of money on both sides of the issue, you’re probably going to get it killed.”

The amount of lobbying support or opposition does affect the likelihood of success, the Watchdog.org analysis found. If a bill had twice as much or more lobbyist support than opposition, the success rate bumped up to 35 percent — still 12 percentage points less than the average success rate. But if a bill had overwhelming lobbying opposition, the kill-rate jumped to 95 percent, meaning if lobbyists didn’t like your bill it was almost always dead in the water.

RELATED: Special interests spend big but most don’t want to talk about it.

Using a database of disclosures in which lobbyists indicated support, opposition or bills they were monitoring or amending, Watchdog.org matched a bill’s number to a legislative database that indicated what happened to the bill by the end of the session. Counting the net total indications of support versus opposition revealed the bills got an overwhelming lobby — for or against.

One caveat in the analysis is that lobbyists often indicate they are monitoring a bill they oppose or hope to modify, but there was no way to statistically analyze those bills without to talking to dozens of lobbyists about hundreds of bills. Nearly all the lobbyists Watchdog.org contacted for these stories did not return calls and emails seeking comment.

Nevertheless, the sponsors of heavily lobbied bills often don’t know the level of lobbying until it’s too late.

State Rep. Janak Joshi, R-Colorado Springs, sponsored a bill to close the Affordable Care Act state exchange in Colorado, which became the most lobbied-against bill this session.

While the bill realistically never had a chance of passing the Democrat-controlled House, the database showed 69 lobbyists indicated opposition to House Bill 1066; only one supported it and nearly 30 monitored it. Over the five-month session, lobbyist indicated opposition to the bill more than 460 times, the reports show.

“Lobbying was extremely important, and lobbying is what passed (the exchange) in the first place,” said Joshi, conceding he was surprised at the level of opposition. “They also know that as long as Democrats are in control, it’s going to die.”

Despite that, Joshi promised to bring the legislation back next year because he believes the exchange is a huge waste of tax money, and an audit prompted by legislation that did pass this year — Senate Bill 19 — will uncover more problems with the state nonprofit that runs the health exchange.

Across the aisle, Rep. KC Becker’s proposal to fund long-term but reversible birth control had overwhelming support — 53 lobbyists indicated support more than 400 times in monthly disclosures over the five-month session. Only two lobbyists indicated opposition to the bill, and about a dozen monitored it.

Despite that the support, House Bill 1194 died in the Senate State, Veterans and Military Affairs committee.

“I know there was a lot of support, but I don’t know the exact hours spent lobbying,” said Becker, D-Boulder, adding the bill would have decreased poverty, costs for Medicaid and the need for many abortions.

Becker said she found that if certain groups, such as Colorado Union of Taxpayers or the Principles of Liberty, are opposed, Republicans take notice.

“It doesn’t matter how many people are lobbying against,” she said. “It matters who’s lobbying against it.”