Shutterstock

Consumers have become responsible for an increasing share of their medical expenses in recent years. Yet household budgeting hasn’t kept pace with this reality, experts say, and that’s led to some scrambling when the bills come due.

Employees of midsize and large companies are expected to incur an average of $2,487 in out-of-pocket health-care costs in 2015, up from $2,005 in 2013, according to health and benefits consulting firm Aon Hewitt. Out-of-pocket costs include copayments and deductibles, but exclude the monthly premium charge. On the federal marketplace under Obamacare, the out-of-pocket spending cap ranges from $1,975 for individual platinum plans to $6,359 for individual bronze plans, according to a recent report from the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Medicare overpays as hospital prices rise (13:39) Soaring hospital bills for the sickest Medicare patients can throw the government’s payment formula out of whack.

Andy Tilp, a certified financial planner outside of Portland, Ore., recently saw a 60-year-old client hit his health plan’s out-of-pocket limit after a stroke. “All of a sudden — bang — there’s $6,000, and where does that come from?” Tilp said.

Fortunately, Tilp’s client made a full recovery and had enough in his emergency fund to cover his stroke-related expenses. But in the same situation, many Americans wouldn’t have adequate funds. The median amount of liquid financial assets among non-elderly households is $4,560, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of Federal Reserve data. This figure includes checking and savings accounts, money market accounts, certificates of deposits, savings bonds and non-retirement brokerage accounts, but excludes the value of dedicated retirement accounts such as 401(K)s.

What this relatively paltry savings has led to, experts say, is some less-than-optimal strategies for paying medical bills. Of those who cashed out a retirement account held with a previous employer, 21% reported using the money to pay a medical expense, according to the T. Rowe Price 2015 Family Financial Trade-Offs Survey. Others take hardship distributions or loans from their 401(k))s to pay their medical bills.

Try to steer clear of retirement savings

Jeopardizing our retirement savings should be a last resort, financial planners say.

Those who cash out old 401(k)s instead of rolling the funds into an individual retirement account will see their nest egg reduced not just by the amount saved, but also by the growth on that money if it had stayed invested over the long haul. Workers taking a 401(k) loan will also lose out on compound growth and must carefully follow the rules of repayment or face stiff penalties. Hardship distributions do not require repayment, but they are usually included in gross income and may be subject to an additional tax on early distributions.

However, if faced with the choice of taking a 401(k) loan or putting a medical bill on a credit card with a high interest rate, the former might very well be the better option, Tilp said. While 401(k) loans must be repaid with interest, the worker is essentially paying it to himself.

The best solution is to build medical expenses into our emergency funds, experts say. To the extent that Americans have rainy day funds at all, we’ve tended to see them as a source of funds if the car breaks down, the boiler needs replacing, or we lose our jobs.

Yet in this era of increased medical costs, experts recommend also budgeting for our annual health-care liability. Most health insurance plans have a consumer-spending cap known as an “out-of-pocket maximum;” in some plans, it’s equal to the deductible, while in others it’s higher.

It’s not just unexpected medical crises that cause folks to hit their plan’s out-of-pocket maximum, although expenses do mount quicker in emergencies. Those with chronic conditions, who visit the doctor frequently and take multiple medications, may also find themselves approaching that limit.

Stashing the health-care cash

By definition, emergency funds need to be liquid. Yet a regular savings or checking account isn’t necessarily the best place for one, since it can be too easy to dip into for nonemergencies, Tilp said.

He likes to park clients’ rainy day money in Series I savings bonds. Sold online by the U.S. Treasury at www.treasurydirect.gov, these bonds earn interest for up to 30 years. Yet they are redeemable after 12 months with just a three months’ interest penalty, and there’s no penalty after five years.

Health-specific accounts are another way to ensure that funds aren’t squandered on nonemergency purchases. Workers who have access to a flexible spending account through their employer can set aside pretax dollars for medical expenses. Under these plans, pretax dollars get withdrawn every pay period to fund qualifying medical expenses and supplies — everything from doctors’ copays to orthodontia to diabetes test strips. For 2015, the maximum annual amount that participants can put into their flexible spending account is $2,550.

Paired with high-deductible health insurance plans, health savings accounts allow savers to sock away money for medical expenses now or later. Unlike flexible spending accounts, whose funds are withdrawn through payroll deductions and must be used or lost within a specific time-frame, health saving account funds are portable and do not expire. HSAs are triple tax-exempt: money isn’t taxed on the way in, grows on a tax-deferred basis, and can be withdrawn tax-free to pay for medical expenses, now or in retirement. Money withdrawn for nonmedical expenses is taxed and may be subject to an additional penalty.

If an employer doesn’t offer a health-savings account but offers a high-deductible health insurance plan that meets certain criteria, employees can go out and open their own health-savings account at a bank or other financial institution, said Shelby George, senior vice president of adviser services at Manning & Napier, an investment firm based outside of Rochester, N.Y.

The accounts can be a good way to manage health-care expenses, George said: “You’re really talking about the blocking and tackling of a personal budget.”

More from MarketWatch