By Herman Cain

It's time for Republicans to stop focusing on who shut down the government and tell the real truth.

Consider the evidence!



When Vincent Gray, the Democrat mayor of Washington, D.C., appealed to Senator Harry Reid to end the shutdown because of the collateral impact it is having on people in the District of Columbia, Reid told Gray, "I'm on your side, don't screw it up."

Translation: We are going to hold out until we get everything we want and give up nothing to the Republicans.



The Democrats want to increase the debt ceiling with no conditions so they can continue to spend this nation into oblivion. Over the last four years, the ratio of increased national debt to economic growth has been 2-to-1.



Democrats want to continue to impose the ObamaCare disaster on the nation despite the negative cost to people, businesses and lost jobs. They don't care.



ObamaCare has driven health insurance rates up for most Americans when the promise was that rates would go down. ObamaCare has caused health insurance to be unaffordable for millions of people when previously they had insurance. And ObamaCare has caused millions of people to lose their doctors when the promise was that they could keep their doctors.



The House Republicans have sent numerous continuing resolutions for funding the government to the Democrat-controlled Senate, but the Democrats rejected all of them and consistently blamed the Republicans for a government shutdown. Democrats want the federal government shutdown to be as visible, and painful, as possible to garner public support for their blame-the-Republicans narrative:

World War II veterans were denied access to the open air national World War II Memorial in the name of a government shutdown by the Obama administration. They were later admitted after a huge public outcry.

Families of fallen soldiers were denied benefits to meet the remains of loved ones returned to the USA in the name of a government shutdown.

People were denied access to national parks and handles to drinking water fountains removed in case some people entered anyway in the name of a government shutdown.

Federal workers who could least afford to be furloughed during the government shutdown are the most affected.

The IRS is not sending out refunds, but we are still expected to file our taxes and make payments on time.

Democrats also don't care about the real impact ObamaCare and their policies are having on the working class, even as they continue to make special exceptions for the political class.



The median family income has declined every year since Obama has taken office. It is down from over $53,000 per year to $51,000, and continuing to decline due to this anemic economy.



The ratio of part-time jobs to full-time jobs created since the beginning of 2013 is 7-to-1, due to the impact of ObamaCare. Meanwhile, 23 million Americans are unemployed.



If the Democrats cared about the people, they have had plenty of opportunities to end the pain and blame game. It's all about trying to gain political advantage.



Consider the evidence and not the rhetoric. Democrats don't care about the people. It's all about politics.