The media mogul, who was rushed to a hospital in Argentina on Friday, thanks the medical staff and his supporters.

Ted Turner is out of the hospital and on his way back to the U.S.

The 75-year-old media mogul was taken to the hospital in Argentina on Friday and underwent a minor surgical procedure due to appendicitis.

STORY: Ted Turner Hospitalized in South America

In a statement released Monday, Turner said in part: "I'm happy to report I'm recuperating well and looking forward to getting back to business as usual."

The CNN and Turner Broadcasting Systems founder thanked the doctors and medical staff at "both hospitals in Bariloche and Buenos Aires" who tended to him and expressed his appreciation to the media outlets who reported on his hospitalization and all those who shared their well wishes.

"To my family, current and former colleagues and everyone else who called, sent notes of encouragement and get well wishes, I can't thank you enough for lifting my spirits during my ordeal," Turner said in his statement. "During moments like this I tend to reflect on the past, and while I have dealt with many difficult situations in my lifetime, I am humbled by this experience and will be forever grateful to you all."

STORY: Whatever Happened to Ted Turner?

According to Turner's spokesman Phillip Evans, who released the statement, this will be the mogul's final communication on this matter.

Turner's full statement is below.

"As I head back to the U.S., I wanted to take a moment to personally respond to the wonderful outpouring of concern and well wishes during my brief hospital stay in Argentina. As reported, I underwent a minor surgical procedure due to appendicitis. I'm happy to report I'm recuperating well and looking forward to getting back to business as usual. The doctors and medical staff at both hospitals in Bariloche and Buenos Aires were amazing and took really good care of me. To the hundreds of global media outlets who reported on my condition, I offer my heartfelt appreciation and admiration for your professionalism and journalistic integrity. To my family, current and former colleagues and everyone else who called, sent notes of encouragement and get well wishes, I can't thank you enough for lifting my spirits during my ordeal. During moments like this I tend to reflect on the past, and while I have dealt with many difficult situations in my lifetime, I am humbled by this experience and will be forever grateful to you all."