Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Judaism, Judy Brown, This is not a love story, ultra-orthodox judiasm, Entertainment News

Using a pen name, Judy Brown wrote the controversial young-adult book “Hush,” fiction that took on sexual child abuse in the ultra-Orthodox Jewish community of Borough Park. It’s easy to imagine that Brown’s next book — a memoir with the title “This Is Not a Love Story” (read an excerpt here) and a cover graced with a photo of an impish child — might be a tell-all memoir about even darker corners. But the memoir, told in a mesmerizing, old-world to the point of being otherworldly style, is a rare look into the world of Brown’s family, especially her unknowable “crazy” brother, and the comforting rituals and disturbing superstitions of her Chassidic community.

We spoke to Brown about family, leaving fundamentalism, the perils of ignorance, and the other concerns of her new book. The interview has been edited and condensed.

The book’s really unexpected. I was assuming that it was going to be a memoir and that it was going to delve into some really dark things, and the writing and content really took me by surprise. Are you getting that from other people too?

Inherently, if you’re writing a book about leaving the community, you left it because you weren’t happy. My book was never about leaving — it’s about my autistic brother and the way it was handled within that planet. I really just said it the way it was. I don’t find the ultra-Orthodox world to be as inherently dark and traumatic as it could be. It could be in many ways, but for the 90 percent that stay, it is not. It’s a vibrant, weird little ecosystem of its own, but it makes perfect sense for those in it. When I speak about my autistic brother, that was instinctively my voice because my whole experience was through the Orthodox world. It wasn’t about leaving it. I didn’t think about that when I wrote it. I just wrote the experience the way it was and the way it unfolded.

Can you talk about the way love is perceived within that community and why you chose to call your book “This Is Not a Love Story?”

There’s no such thing as love. There’s only such a thing as life. Love is always considered a concept in relationship to God and spirituality. When it comes to couplehood, marriage, the most important form of what most people would call love would be transliterated by us to stability, commitment, work, the scene of a family sitting happily around a Sabbath dinner table and passing on the heritage. That’s the idea of love. It’s more the words stability and trust and commitment. I think it’s simply because of what is inherent to every religious and Jewish society. Because when it comes to marriage, the word love is connected to sexuality. So, if sexuality cannot be accepted on its own terms, then love cannot be either in that way. The whole reason why people get married in the Orthodox world is to have children and to pass on the heritage to the next generation. It’s not because of sexual attraction.

The title was the most complicated part of the book. I didn’t come up with the title. It was one of my agents that came up with it. We could not come up with the title. We simply could not think of a title because we had this ongoing internal debate if the title should portray the idea of autism, of Judaism, of love. We only came up with the title a short while ago. We went through many bad titles until this came out. I found it to be so perfect because this is a love story, but on our terms and in our language. But the word love as seen through the secular perspective is seen as a threat to the Orthodox way of thinking.

Which is very similar to Christian fundamentalism too, the same concept. Love is selfish, love is taking you away from God. It’s a different tradition, but the only goal is to spread the ideas and be devoted to God. If you’re in love with somebody, then it’s taking you away.

Right. I think it’s also linked to — in the secular world the word love is linked to sexuality. If you love somebody it’s because you are attracted to them sexually. It’s not just selfish, it’s a very short-term prospect. Because what happens when you tire of them sexually? Now the commitment is allowed to be broken? You no longer need to love them? Not that I look at it that way, but it’s kind of true. That’s what happens. They fall in love and then they are no longer sexually attracted, and now there’s a reason to hate each other. They don’t see a need for commitment because their whole commitment was based on love, which was inherently based on something superficial, something that biologically doesn’t last past a certain amount of time. In any world that emphasizes family, you can’t have that.

Let’s talk about family a little bit — let’s talk about your brother. The memoir talks about your parents’ marriage a lot and the sort of family dynamic, but it focuses on your brother, who everybody believed was crazy. There was a lot of speculation about what caused it and there was even speculation that there was a family curse.

It’s something that happened very slowly for me, looking back. I didn’t look back for a long time. I just took it as it came. Another thing about having an autistic brother in this world — because of the dynamics of our little planet and the ignorance of autism — so many families gave their children away. I don’t know anyone with an autistic sibling. It was very isolating in that sense: I was the only one I knew who had an autistic sibling. I didn’t have these other reference points. It took me until adulthood, when autism in the last decade exploded as an issue. That was a massively surprising and revealing conversation for me to follow. I couldn’t believe it. Suddenly everybody had an autistic sibling. All these people were talking about it. It was in this magazine and that magazine. That was my real journey, when the issue exploded in the secular world in such a large way. When I look back I don’t look at it as frustration. I recognized very early on that when it came to special children, the Orthodox world, although peculiar in its own ways, it wasn’t that much different from the outside world.

I remember when I was a teenager I read at least two powerful books of parents and one of a teacher about a special child. The family dynamics were really familiar to me. In both books the father did not want the child. He wanted nothing to do with the child. He believed that it was the best thing to do for the family. The mother fought for the child. I think I recognized early on that this isn’t an Orthodox thing. Though we have our own thing, like marriage prospects, that triggered this reaction, it wasn’t that much different than the outside world. So, as soon as I began to follow these discussions and opened up my ideas about autism, since then looking back I realized how incredibly lucky my brother was. For me it’s one thing, but at the end of the day this could have gone down so badly. That he was 7 at the time he was diagnosed, it’s a miracle that he landed the right person. He wasn’t just diagnosed, but the person who diagnosed him, Dr. Shulman, was hands-on. The doctor guided my mother. If we are talking comparison to other children, they were never seen again. At the end of the day it ended well and my brother was one of the really lucky ones. I find it impossible to judge at the time given the general ignorance of the time.

When I started reading your book I would have guessed this was something written by somebody much older. I went and looked you up and realized that you’re in your 30s. What were you reading when you were young? How do you think your background helped you create your writer’s voice? It’s very strong and it’s unique. It doesn’t remind me of anybody in particular.

Ironically, I didn’t really learn how to write until I began to leave the ultra-Orthodox world. I always had this writing instinct in me. Obviously it’s something you are born with, but it was very frustrating to me because I came from a world — part of being so enclosed was that we didn’t speak proper English. We speak what we call Yinglish, a combination of Yiddish and English and Talmudic ancient Hebrew. I’m not kidding. I was writing a little bit in Yiddish, I was writing a little bit in Hebrew, but I was trying to write in English and it was very frustrating to me. I knew I lacked words, but I didn’t even know what words they were that I lacked.