By of the

Madison— New state Supreme Court Justice Rebecca Bradley and one of her challengers aren't telling the public their views on key rulings, while a third candidate is providing a window into his views.

The three candidates for a full 10-year term on the high court are united on one issue: They all say they will not coordinate their activities with groups that pump money into political races, even though a state Supreme Court decision this summer made it easier for candidates to work closely with issue groups.

Gov. Scott Walker this month appointed Bradley to fill the vacancy on the court after Justice N. Patrick Crooks died Sept. 21. Bradley had already announced she was running for the seat that Crooks planned to give up next year. Running against her are Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Joe Donald and Appeals Court Judge JoAnne Kloppenburg.

A Feb. 16 primary will narrow the field to two candidates. The general election is April 5.

In an interview, Bradley emphasized her belief that judges should interpret the law as written and not impose their personal beliefs. She declined to provide her views on the reasoning behind recent court rulings, such as those that upheld the state's voter ID law, allowed gay marriage and kept in place limits on collective bargaining for public workers.

"My personal feelings about those cases are irrelevant," she said.

Similarly, Kloppenburg said she couldn't form an opinion on those cases without reading all the briefs and researching case law. But she said she was troubled that the public widely believed the results of cases that go to the state Supreme Court are predetermined.

"If they believe that the outcome of cases...are foregone conclusions, then that undermines the public respect for the court and the authority of the court," she said.

Donald was willing to discuss some of his views, and he raised concerns about some of the state Supreme Court's decisions in recent years.

Gay marriage. U.S. District Judge Barbara Crabb last year ruled same-sex couples had the right to marry and couples that day rushed to courthouses to get married. A week later, Crabb stayed her ruling and the marriages stopped. The U.S. Supreme Court allowed gay marriage to proceed in Wisconsin in October 2014, and it approved it nationwide in a ruling this June.

Bradley declined to say what she thought of those decisions. No same-sex couple has ever asked her to perform a marriage, but she would perform one if asked, said her campaign spokeswoman, Madison Wiberg.

Likewise, Kloppenburg declined to say what she made of the decision. She said she has officiated at same-sex weddings.

Donald embraced the court rulings and said he officiated at same-sex weddings the day Crabb issued her initial decision.

"It was a joyous occasion," Donald said. "Any time you allow people to enjoy the fruits of liberty, it is a good day."

Voter ID. Republicans in 2011 approved a law requiring voters to show photo ID at the polls, but the measure was stalled for years by court rulings. The state Supreme Court last year issued a pair of decisions that upheld the law, which it tweaked to make sure no one has to pay to get a state-issued ID card.

The law took effect this year, after the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review challenges in a separate pair of cases.

Bradley and Kloppenburg would not say if they agreed with the rulings.

Donald did not say whether he thought the courts resolved the issue correctly, but he questioned whether the law was looking for "a solution to a problem that doesn't exist."

"The effect of the law is anyone who...doesn't have the ID, they are essentially disenfranchised," he said.

Act 10. In 2011, Republicans put in place the tight limits on collective bargaining for public workers, and unions sued to block them. The state Supreme Court and U.S. 7th Circuit Court of Appeals in separate decisions last year found that the measure, known as Act 10, did not violate workers' constitutional rights.

Bradley and Kloppenburg did not say whether they agreed with those rulings.

Donald questioned whether the state Supreme Court had adequately explained its rationale.

"I don't particularly agree that it's well-reasoned, but that's the law," Donald said.

John Doe. In ending a John Doe investigation into Walker's campaign and conservative groups, the state Supreme Court in July ruled 4-2 candidates and issue groups can work closely together. John Doe investigations are often conducted in secret and allow prosecutors to force people to produce documents and give testimony.

Bradley did not say what she thought of the ruling.

Donald said he was "still trying to figure out that decision" and Kloppenburg did not give her views on the ultimate ruling. But both criticized the majority for relying on facts that were not in the court record. For instance, the majority cited reports from conservative media outlets about how search warrants were executed — details that had not been established in the court record.

Donald said the court should have gotten lower courts to determine the facts. Kloppenburg said "judging 101" stipulates that "you are confined to the record before you."

"There was departure from that rule in the recent John Doe decisions," she said.

The ruling gives candidates the ability to work with issue groups. But Bradley, Donald and Kloppenburg said they wouldn't do that.

"I have absolutely no plans to coordinate any campaign activities," Bradley said.

"I'm trying to run a clean, independent race," Donald said.

"We're not going to talk to third party groups," Kloppenburg said.

The ruling dealt with three separate cases, one of which was earlier decided by the District 4 Court of Appeals that Kloppenburg sits on. In that case, targets of the probe challenged technical aspects of how the investigation was handled, contending special prosecutors could not conduct John Doe probes and reserve judges could not oversee them.

Kloppenburg and the other appeals court judges threw out that challenge, finding the probe could continue. The Supreme Court unanimously agreed on that point, but ended the probe on other grounds. Kloppenburg and the other appeals court judges didn't rule on the case that dealt with the substantive issues about campaign finance laws.

Special Prosecutor Francis Schmitz has asked the Supreme Court to reconsider its decision. Bradley said she was researching whether she would participate in the request for reconsideration.