Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, Foreign policy, Healthcare Reform, Iran, Iran deal, Iranian nuclear talks, Jeb Bush, National security, Obamacare, Republican Primary, Scott Walker, Elections News, Politics News

Scott Walker is ready to start a war with Iran. In fact, he’s so ready to attack Iran that he’s openly discussing the possibility of initiating hostilities within hours of taking the oath of office as the next president of the United States. Here’s what the Republican governor of Wisconsin and 2016 candidate said over the weekend at a press conference in Iowa:

WALKER: It’s very possible – God forbid, but it’s very possible – that the next president could be called to take aggressive actions, including military action, on the first day in office. And I don’t want a president who is not prepared to act on day one. So, as far as me, as far as my position, I’m going to be prepared to be president on day one.

You really can’t get more hawkish than to float the possibility of launching a war before the inaugural ball. This wildly bellicose rhetoric from Walker is part of his campaign to be the most aggressively irresponsible critic of the new multilateral diplomatic framework to curb Iran’s nuclear ambitions. Walker’s already promised to withdraw from the deal immediately upon taking office and instead pursue sanctions that will “cripple” Iran. He hasn’t convincingly explained how he’d do that (withdrawing from the deal would alienate every partner and ally we’d need to impose a “crippling” sanctions regime) but “having a coherent plan” is less important to Walker than demonstrating his unshakeable opposition to this Obama legacy item.

Walker is also trying to lay down a marker for opposition to the Iran deal and make the case that other Republicans in the 2016 field are insufficiently committed to its demise. As Jim Newell noted this morning, Jeb Bush – who is no fan of the Iran deal – broke with some of his fellow candidates by taking the (relatively sensible) position that he would wait until his national security and diplomatic teams are in place before moving to unwind a major international agreement and putting us on the path towards yet another war in the Middle East. In response, Walker’s team is blasting Jeb as an indecisive squish.

Here’s an actual statement Team Walker put out from former U.S. delegate to the United Nations Robert O’Brien:

The next president must terminate this disastrous deal with the Islamic Republic of Iran on Day 1, as Governor Walker has repeatedly pledged to do. In fact, the process of undoing this deal begins right now. We don’t need more information, we don’t need to wait to confirm the next Secretary of State, we need decisive leadership and we need it now. This won’t be easy, but when America leads, and has a strong president with clear priorities who believes in American strength, the rest of the world will follow.