Reprinted from MEDICARE ADVANTAGE NEWS , biweekly news and business strategies about Medicare Advantage plans, product design, marketing, enrollment, market expansions, CMS audits, and countless federal initiatives in MA and Medicaid managed care. Sign up for an $87 two-month trial subscription today .

It is not hard to see in the revised Medicare Marketing Guidelines that CMS released July 2 what issues are at the top of the agency’s mind in terms of needing marketing-related regulatory changes. A good chunk of the revisions relate to (1) the accuracy and dissemination of directories of network providers and pharmacies, (2) the need for clear disclaimers in language about member benefits and costs and (3) the use of online, including mobile-phone application, means of conveying needed information to beneficiaries.

Overall, says Jeff Fox, president and CEO of the Gorman Health Group, LLC consulting firm, there were no big surprises in the new guidelines, and plans will appreciate the clarity CMS is furnishing on topical issues. Several of the changes in the guidelines, he tells MAN, will give plans more freedom to create new incentive and benefit programs and communicate to members about them, although others will mean plans may have to overhaul and add to some of the language in their marketing materials.

The provider directories issue follows a year marked by verified complaints about the dissemination and accuracy of information about Medicare Advantage and stand-alone Prescription Drug Plan (PDP) network pharmacies in the case of Aetna Inc. (MAN 4/23/15, p. 4) and midyear provider-network changes for numerous plans. CMS apparently has decided that part of the solution needs to be on the marketing side.

The new guidelines require plans to furnish at the time of enrollment or renewal hard copies of provider and pharmacy directories or tell both new and renewing members how they can request them. Plans must mail such requested hard copies within three business days of receipt of the request.

Moreover, when there is a “significant change” to the provider/pharmacy and/or the facility network, CMS said in the guidelines, the plan sponsor should work through its CMS account manager “to create a special mailing to be sent to enrollees.”

And the agency said “the online provider directory must contain a special notation to highlight providers that are not accepting new patients.” CMS added that it expects plans to update this information as soon as changes are known and to check themselves at least monthly to determine if there have been changes on this and related provider-access issues.

Fox notes that CMS has been auditing MA and Part D plans regularly on provider access and availability (MAN 5/21/15, p. 1) and has found lots of problems. It is “very difficult” for plans to manage provider access, he asserts, especially since in some cases the insurers are “the last to know” when a provider closes a practice to new patients. MA sponsors often focus now on changes involving primary care physicians, but CMS is making clear they also need to keep up on and disseminate information about specialists, according to Fox.

In the new marketing guidelines, CMS is not requiring plans to do this by frequently reprinting and mailing hard-copy provider directories, which would have been “pretty impactful,” especially for bigger plans, he points out. However, the agency does want, Fox says, plan sales representatives to bring technology to marketing meetings and show consumers how to access current provider information online.

CMS Puts Major Focus on Disclaimers

If there was any surprise in the guidelines, it was in the large amount of discussion about “disclaimers,” Fox says. CMS laid out in detail, including the required language, he says, when to use them for marketing plan benefits. Fox stresses that these aren’t “over the top” changes, but instead focus on such aspects as the words plans need to use in laying out member specifics on coinsurance, copayments and deductibles.

The agency, for instance, wants plans that have different copays in different benefit plans to make this clear to prospective members. Sponsors failing to do that, cautions Fox, may be directed by CMS to revise their materials and resubmit them to the agency, thereby causing a substantial delay in when plans can use marketing pieces for the affected products. While this new approach might lead to additional work for plans, it is a good change and could help plans avoid Complaints Tracking Module (CTM) gripes being filed against them by members, he says.

Another new disclaimer requirement is that plans mentioning pharmaceutical formularies in their marketing materials must say the formularies can change at any time and that members “will receive notice when necessary” about those changes. The same kind of disclaimer rule applies to provider and pharmacy networks.

Several other changes in the marketing guidelines are clear pluses for MA sponsors, according to Fox. One of them specifically allows the insurers to include details about rewards and incentives (R&I) programs in marketing materials in conjunction with information on plan benefits for potential enrollees, as long as this is done “without discrimination” among recipients.

Fox recalls that CMS had granted such permission previously but then backed off it so that in the most recent Annual Election Period the MA sponsors couldn’t discuss this until after enrollment. The switch back to being able to discuss this at “presale” time, he says, is a “pleasant surprise” and a “big plus” for plan sponsors.

Similarly, he notes, CMS indicated in the guidelines that MA plans again may mention in marketing materials such extra features as discount dental plans that it had backtracked on in recent years. These dental plans don’t cost plan sponsors anything, observes Fox, and are attractive to the insurers, especially at a time when many of them cut back on benefits that are costly to the insurers because of the financial squeeze caused by declining MA payment rates under the Affordable Care Act.

There are also new restrictions on MA plans in the guidelines. Some of them pertain to the use of websites and mobile-phone apps. A new provision in the guidelines, for instance, says plans must resubmit web pages for CMS review when changes are made to plan benefits, premiums or cost sharing. Fox says “we were expecting” this requirement and “welcome the clarity.”

In a related provision, plans wanting to use mobile apps for marketing to prospective enrollees now will have to submit the planned app via a document (not a screen shot of the app) in CMS’s Health Plan Management System communications link.

And CMS clarified in the guidelines that once MA plans start marketing their 2016 plans this October, they no longer may market 2015 plans. The agency is “just clearing up” this requirement, and plans “need to manage” it; if they do, the provision will be “not really impactful,” Fox says.

View the marketing guidance by visiting the July 16 From the Editor entry at MAN's subscriber-only web page: www.aishealth.com/newsletters/medicareadvantagenews.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $75 discount on the all-new AIS’s Medicare and Medicaid Market Data: 2015.