Detective Brian Koopman scheduled for April trial

Loveland Police Detective Brian Koopman, left, and his attorney David Goddard leave the Larimer County Justice Center after a hearing on Wednesday in Fort Collins. Koopman has been charged with attempting to influence a public servant during the investigation and prosecution of a homicide case. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

FORT COLLINS — More details of the charge pressed against Loveland police detective Brian Koopman have emerged in court documents obtained Wednesday.

Koopman, 45, is charged with attempting to influence a public servant, a Class 4 felony, after a special investigation by the Weld County District Attorney's Office. This charge is in connection with Koopman's testimony concerning an investigation of Leroy Wallace in a homicide.

In that case, Wallace pleaded guilty to second-degree murder in the death of Christina Anjoleen Gray, 42, after she was found dead in her apartment in Loveland on Dec. 18, 2013. Wallace was sentenced to a 30-year prison term, and a stalking charge pressed against him was dropped.

According to documents filed by the Weld County District Attorney's Office in October, the Loveland police detective's criminal charge stems from his testimony in a preliminary hearing outlining the evidence established for both charges pressed against Wallace — stalking and second-degree murder.

Advertisement

The prosecution filed a transcribed version of Koopman's September 2014 testimony and laid out arguments for several statements the detective made that the Weld County prosecutors allege were intentionally untrue.

Among the allegedly false statements prosecutors say warrant the detective's criminal charge, is one in which Koopman testifies that Wallace had entered a Walgreens shortly after Gray just three days before her death — a fact the prosecution said is clearly contradicted by surveillance footage obtained from the store.

This evidence was the main basis for the stalking charge Wallace initially faced.

"This is factually untrue," the prosecution's argument stated. "Mr. Wallace was never in the Walgreens at the same time as Ms. Gray and Mr. Burlingham. (Koopman) could not have observed that which he testified."

The report goes on to state that Koopman's testimony was untrue when he testified that Wallace had not made a purchase in the Walgreens shortly after Gray had left the building — something the prosecution stated the surveillance footage once again proves to be untrue.

On Feb. 11, Koopman filed an affidavit of retraction with the court, a portion of which was included in the prosecution's Oct. 1 filing laying out the facts of the case.

"My response to all of the questions asked at the Preliminary Hearing regarding the Walgreens video surveillance footage ultimately located in Detective (Paul) Arreola's possession were not solely based on the video footage itself," Koopman stated in February. "My responses relied heavily on police reports and what fellow Detectives had reported to me in the early stages of the investigation."

Prosecutors stated that his responses do not align with other officers' accounts and that these reports he references do not exist. Investigators also allege that Koopman lied under oath in several other instances during Wallace's preliminary hearing.

The first of those instances concerns Koopman's testimony regarding Wallace having a "boxer injury" at the time of his arrest.

"At no time during this examination was the term 'boxer injury' used by medical personnel, law enforcement personnel, or by Wallace," prosecutors stated.

Another instance prosecutors allege Koopman intentionally lied on the stand was when he made statements regarding the timeline in which incriminating palm prints in the victim's blood were found at the scene of Gray's death.

According to the Weld County district attorneys, Koopman said the prints were found on the day of Gray's death despite a criminalist's report stating they were found the day after, on Dec. 19, 2013.

In a transcript from the homicide's preliminary hearing, the files state what Koopman said in response to an inquiry by defense asking about the date discrepancy.

"(The criminalist) described that — with the way she's describing that, they're evident initially, but (the palm prints are) a lot more evident once things start to dry out," Koopman testified in September 2014. "That's the way she described that to me."

Another instance outlined argues that investigators allege Koopman intentionally testified to false information regarding whether or not a dog was locked in a room at the crime scene. Koopman stated this was evident by scratches on an interior door in an arrest affidavit for Wallace.

Prosecuting lawyers stated that other officers' supplemental reports found that the door had normal wear — nothing that indicated a dog was attempting to get out of the room. It stated Koopman had not personally observed the door in question.

Prosecutors also state that Koopman lied about audio recording all of his interactions with Wallace during the investigation — something they state Koopman contradicted himself on the stand about after stating there was an hour and a half of an interaction that was not recorded.

However, in Koopman's 2014 testimony he does not specify how much of the interaction with Wallace was not recorded.

"There was a portion of it in the beginning that the recorder was not on," Koopman said in the September 2014 preliminary hearing. "... The beginning."

Lastly, prosecutors allege the detective did not accurately testify to the level of amphetamine in Gray's body at the time of her death.

While Koopman testified that the victim had a small amount of the drug in her body, Weld County investigators argue that the level of amphetamine was far more serious.

On the scale that was used, Gray's body was found to have a 1,700 level — according to reports anywhere from 200 to 600 on that scale is "associated with violent and irrational behavior."

"So Ms. Gray's amphetamine level of 1,700 was more than twice the upper limit and almost three times the upper limit of those levels that are associated with violent and irrational behavior," defense attorneys questioned Koopman in September 2014.

"According to (the report), yes," Koopman said in that hearing.

After the outline of the allegedly false testimony, prosecutors petitioned the court for two separate internal affairs investigations into Koopman's actions and any investigation materials regarding an anonymous letter sent to City Councilor Troy Krenning alleging the detective had destroyed evidence.

Loveland attorneys filed a motion to suppress the prosecution's request for those documents. It was denied. At the end of October, city of Loveland assistant attorney Tree Ablao handed the documents to 10th Judicial District Judge Scott Epstein for review.

He ruled that the a portion of the submitted documents were relevant to the case and will be given to both attorneys — who will follow a protective order to maintain strict confidentiality.

The detective appeared in court Thursday for a status conference as both defense and prosecuting lawyers prepare for the April 25, 2016, trial.

In light of this criminal charge, Koopman's role as detective has now been questioned in other ongoing litigation, including a case regarding Loveland resident Stanley Romanek, a 52-year-old Loveland man charged with distribution and possession of child pornography in February 2014.

In early October, Romanek's attorneys argued for access to Koopman's department personnel files and internal investigation materials. Elizabeth McClintock, one of Romanek's attorneys, said the defense team is looking for impeachment information regarding Koopman.

The detective's charge also came at a time when two civil cases against Koopman are working their way through the legal system.

The oldest lawsuit, initially filed in November 2009, was brought forward by plaintiff Jeremy C. Myers, who is suing Koopman for allegedly violating his constitutional rights when investigators searched his property near the old sugar factory on North Madison Avenue in September 2007 and arrested him on charges of making methamphetamine. The charges were dropped two months later.

The city has spent nearly a quarter of a million dollars defending itself and Koopman in the lawsuit filed by Myers.

The second lawsuit, filed by Tammy Fisher in January 2015, alleges Loveland Police Chief Luke Hecker and Koopman violated her constitutional rights when they initiated what she called an invalid criminal investigation against her in connection with the Romanek case.

Loveland Police Chief Luke Hecker would not comment on the specifics of the cases, but he said at a City Council meeting on June 2 that the public doesn't have the full story. He said that once the truth surfaces and it becomes public knowledge, then people will be able to make more-reasonable decisions about Koopman and his conduct.

Koopman has received seven meritorious service awards and 20 department performance and case involvement recognitions, according to incoming Loveland Interim Police Chief Tim Brown. He has been with the department since April 2002.

Dana Rieck: 970-635-3630, rieckd@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/DanaRieckRH