Nat Borchers' own goal helps Galaxy avoid rare home loss

hello

Portland Timbers midfielder Diego Valeri, center and Los Angeles Galaxy defender Jelle Van Damme jump up for a header during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Portland Timbers forward Lucas Melano, left, and Los Angeles Galaxy midfielder Rafael Garcia battle for the ball during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Los Angeles Galaxy midfielder Baggio Husidic, center, controls the ball against Portland Timbers during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Los Angeles Galaxy forward Gyasi Zardes, center, shoots past Portland Timbers defender Nat Borchers, left, during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Los Angeles Galaxy forward Gyasi Zardes, left, moves the ball away from Portland Timbers goalkeeper Adam Kwarasey, right, during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Los Angeles Galaxy defender Jelle Van Damme, center, kicks the ball against Portland Timbers during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Los Angeles Galaxy midfielder Nigel de Jong, right, heads the ball against Portland Timbers defender Jack Jewsbury during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

Portland Timbers midfielder Neco Brett, center, battles for heading against Los Angeles Galaxy midfielders Rafael Garcia, left, and Nigel de Jong during the first half of an MLS soccer game in Carson, Calif., Sunday April 10, 2016. Associated Press

CARSON, Calif. -- Fanendo Adi opened the scoring for Portland in the 52nd minute, and Nat Borchers' own goal in the 84th helped the Los Angeles Galaxy tie the Timbers 1-1 on Sunday night.

Diego Valeri's diagonal lead pass set up Adi as he peeled away from the defensive back line and finished with a low right-footed shot - his fourth goal of the season.

Borchers made a diving attempt to clear Sebastian Lletget's cross, but inadvertently smashed the header into the Timbers' goal.

The Timbers (1-2-2) have one win at StubHub Center in eight visits; the Galaxy (2-1-2) extended their unbeaten run to 39 of the last 41 home games.

Galaxy defender Robbie Rogers left in the eighth minute due to a hip contusion. Timbers midfielder Darlington Nagbe exited in the 76th after a leg injury from Nigel de Jong's tackle. Referee Allen Chapman gave de Jong a yellow card for the challenge.