Kendra Prospero

While serving as a software developer and in personnel development at IBM, Kendra Prospero frequently mentored and trained other employees, giving them advice on their resume and careers. Three years ago, Prospero decided to take those skills and launch Turning the Corner LLC, a Boulder-based company specializing in recruitment and career counseling services.

Prospero last week talked with the Daily Camera about her business, employment trends and job hunting tips. The following has been edited for clarity and space.

1. What are the biggest differences in the job hunt now as compared to the job hunt pre-recession?

My experience has been that people are still definitely getting jobs and they were getting jobs even through the recession. The biggest difference though is you have to understand how to advertise yourself and how to do it well.

There's an active way through your resume, but also through a more passive way, through your LinkedIn profile.

You need to have both.

You should be getting a job if you're actively applying. If you're not, it's something wrong with your resume.

2. What are some no-nos you see on resumes

Not being relevant. The No. 1 no-no is typos. Do not have typos on your resume. The second ... is it has to be relevant.

Advertisement

Recruiters and hiring managers do not have the time to study a resume to understand why somebody is a fit. You have to be obvious as to why you're a fit for the job.

When I look at the resume, the first think I go to is what they currently are doing.

3. One-page or two-pages for the resume?

It's a debate among the recruiters in the field. My personal opinion is if you've been working for more than eight years, you should have enough experience to have two pages. You do want to see a career path, a progression of careers and accomplishments.

Either are fine but in my opinion, two-page resumes are for working professionals with experience. (Post-college) applicants should stick to one page.

4. For those laid off during the recession and still without a full-time job, what steps can they take to land a job in or outside of their field?

Here's the order I always investigate potential clients:

No. 1, I have to know what they're good at and what they want to do next. Two, if they're actively applying for jobs and if they're not getting interviews, there's something wrong with the resume.

Three, if they're getting interviews and not offers, something is breaking down during the interview.

To get back into the field right now, you need to have those three things in place.

5. How is the market looking now and into 2014?

I feel like it's good. I definitely have seen a lot more movement in the last few weeks than I have all this year. There are a lot of very hot markets — technology is extremely hot.

The same with health care and some in financial services.

There are a lot of jobs.

— Alicia Wallace