Topics: aol_on, Elections 2016, Michael Moore, Movies, where to invade next, Business News, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

Michael Moore’s new film, “Where to Invade Next,” is sure to generate Oscar buzz. It is already on the short list of 15 documentaries from which the final five nominations will be announced on Jan. 14. But rather than wonder whether Moore will score a second Oscar (his first was for “Bowling for Columbine” in 2002), the question to ask is whether this film can spark a political revolution just in time for the 2016 election.

“Where to Invade Next” has a wide release set for Feb. 12, which is also Abraham Lincoln’s birthday and the week of the New Hampshire primary. Coincidence? Definitely not.

The date for the release is only part of the story. The film will be launched in one of the most progressive and activist formats ever conceived. Early test scores of the film have it getting the highest viewer ratings of any of Moore’s previous films. “What it has shown us is the film not only plays well as just a movie, but the issues raised in the film deeply affect people,” Moore said.

So Moore asked his distributors to get on board with a release plan designed to rock the nation: “I said …. give me a month or so to barnstorm the country, me personally, in a big rock ‘n’ roll tour bus, and we will criss-cross the country showing the film for free, leading up to the New Hampshire primary — because the issues in the film are the issues, the real issues, people want being discussed in this election year.” They may also have music and rallies along the way.

Moore has been a constant innovator in political comedy, so it is no surprise that he has hatched a creative marketing plan to draw as much attention to his new film as he can. But it isn’t just the stunts that will make the film socially significant; it’s the actual film itself.

“Where to Invade Next” begins with the observation that the United States has not won a war since World War II. It then comically imagines the Department of Defense calling on Moore to step in and save our nation. His plan? Invade nations not to take them over, but to take their good ideas. We then see a hilariously ironic shot of Moore on a ship draped in the American flag and heading out on his quest.

Moore then embarks on a tour of a series of European nations and one in Africa where he finds society getting it right. From debt-free education to paid leave, women’s rights, prison reform and delicious school lunches, Moore offers viewers a world where people simply live better than we do here.

In a brilliant move, Moore has made his most patriotic film yet without shooting a single frame in the United States.

That doesn’t mean we don’t get glimpses into our own society, but these largely come from news footage of protests in Ferguson, Missouri, and elsewhere — not from Moore’s camerawork. The contrast is stark. Abroad, Moore conquers other nations to pillage their good ideas. At home, we see a nation ripped apart by racism and torn by political division.

The American flag is literally everywhere in this film. And it works as an excellent motif. It is at once ironic and intensely patriotic. Most of the shots have Moore carrying the flag across airports into new countries and planting it strategically as he “claims” what he has found for America in a twist on the well-worn imperialist/militarist gesture.

Reversing the link between the right and obsessive patriotism, now it is “lefty” Moore who brandishes the flag everywhere.

But what starts as funny acquires greater and greater force as the film moves on—a force that might have especially intense consequences this election cycle. Moore’s use of the flag both underscores his very real patriotism, and highlights the way that left progressives have been displaced as advocates for our nation. The irony of Moore carrying the flag references the various ways that his politics have been called out as treasonous, as anti-American, and as subversive. As Moore moves throughout the film alongside the American flag he isn’t just claiming the good ideas of other nations; he is claiming the flag and its symbolic force for those on the left.

It is a bold move and a much-needed one as we enter another election cycle. Geoffrey Nunberg has documented the explicit ways that the right has fashioned itself as the party of patriotism and American values. He points out that it is due to these efforts that even the phrase “liberal values” sounds weird. He reminds us of how awkward it was when John Kerry started his DNC speech with the statement “I’m John Kerry and I’m reporting for duty.” Today conservatives literally “own” the flag and the idea of American values. If any real progressive politics are going to take place in this nation, that will have to change.