What do you do when you turn 62?

Do you file for Social Security benefits as early as possible at 62? Hold off until 66? Or wait until age 70 to receive the maximum benefit?

It’s not always a straightforward answer. For many, it’s a Sudoku puzzle or a Rubik’s cube; pick your mind bender.

The Social Security retirement benefit system has tons of moving parts. Answers can vary based on whether you’re healthy or not, have a spouse, are ready to retire but have school-age children, or even in some cases if you divorced after a long marriage.

The Social Security Administration estimates that 3.9 million people will turn age 62 in 2015 and another 4 million will turn 62 in 2016.

In 2014, the average age of men applying for Social Security retirement benefits was 64.4; it was 64.2 for women.

Here are three issues to consider:

What happens if I claim my benefits at age 62 but want to continue working?

You’d need to consider how much you’d earn at a job and how those wages might reduce your initial Social Security retirement checks.

A so-called earnings test applies each year after you’ve claimed benefits but only until you hit full retirement age.

If you’re turning 62 in 2015 or 2016, your full retirement age is 66. (The full retirement age goes up gradually and will hit 67 for those born in 1960 and after.)

In 2015, Social Security will withhold $1 of benefits for every $2 in wages that you earn above the threshold of $15,720 if you’re 62 to 65.

If you turn age 66 in 2015, the threshold that year is higher at $41,880 and then the withholding drops to $1 in benefits for each $3. But the withholding applies only for the months in 2015 before you turn 66.

Confused? Another wrinkle is you might recover those lost benefits from the earnings test at your full retirement age but it’s a monthly bump up.

Also, someone who switches from one Social Security benefit to another, such as a higher widow’s benefit at full retirement age, won’t see benefits restored, said Laurence J. Kotlikoff, co-author of Get What’s Yours: The Secrets to Maxing Out Your Social Security.

Good news: Investment and pension income will not count toward the earnings test, said Philip Moeller, another co-author of Get What’s Yours.

Bad news: Earnings from jobs not covered by Social Security will count toward the earnings test.

Moeller notes that the earnings test can create a cash flow challenge, which could play havoc with many budgets. Benefit reductions based on the earnings test are not prorated during the year, as you might expect. Instead, the money is taken out upfront in the year.

For example, if your outside earnings reduced your $18,000 annual Social Security retirement benefit to $12,000 the next year, you might expect a $6,000 reduction would take place over time. Maybe a $1,500 monthly payment could be reduced to $1,000 a month for an entire year? But instead you would get no Social Security payment for the first four months of that year and then receive the $1,500 payment for 8 months.

One way to avoid that wild swing is to correctly estimate your annual earnings at the beginning of the earnings year and tell Social Security. That’s not always easy to do.

What can I get if I wait?

Someone who turns 62 this year or next and claims retirement benefits at 62 might see $750 a month instead of the $1,000 that they could see at age 66. Obviously, the real number will depend on what benefits you’re qualified to receive. But the reduction is about 25 percent for those claiming benefits at 62 now instead of waiting until 66.

“Your benefits will be much higher if you wait to collect,” said Kotlikoff, a professor of economics at Boston University.

Age 70 is another trigger year.

“Your retirement benefit is 76 percent higher, adjusted for inflation, if you start it at 70 rather than 62,” Kotlikoff said.

Kotlikoff noted that too often people are so fixated about their fear of dying early that they want to take benefits as soon as possible. But dying is not the real risk here.

“The real risk is living, living to 100 and living on cat food,” Kotlikoff said. “You only need money when you’re alive, it turns out. You don’t need money when you’re dead.”

If someone is married, another reason to possibly delay collecting past 62 could be that survivor spouse benefits would increase, too.

Kotlikoff said he views Social Security as “longevity insurance” if you do not opt to just take benefits simply because you’re age 62.

Would other rules or options apply to you?

Most people do not know the variety of benefits that could be paid out under Social Security, which is partly why the book Get What’s Yours became a best seller earlier this year.

One problem with blindly claiming retirement benefits at age 62 is that some people can forgo another full benefit in the future.

A 62-year-old widower might want to file to collect his survivor benefit, for example, instead of claiming his own retirement benefit at age 62. In that case, he could collect survivor benefits for eight years and then claim his own full retirement benefit when he turns age 70, Kotlikoff said.

“There’s lots of things that can come into play, and only a computer can get it right,” Kotlikoff said.

That’s why we’re seeing more financial planners and others attempt to run numbers on when to collect benefits.

Sometimes, 62 is just another birthday and one more reason to eat cake. It may be the time to claim a Social Security check — or not, depending on your circumstances.