Rob Lehman, the former chief aide to Sen. Rob Portman Rob PortmanJuan Williams: Electoral map looks grim for Trump McConnell touts 'Senate squad' in Wes Anderson-style video Liberal super-PAC hits Johnson for supporting Trump MORE (R-Ohio), has been named the co-chairman of WilmerHale’s policy shop.

Lehman recently stepped down from his role atop Portman’s office, where he had served since 2011, and was replaced by veteran lobbyist Mark Isakowitz.

He has more than two decades of experience in Congress and the executive branch, having served as the chief of staff for the Office of Management and Budget and for the United States Trade Representative.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Rob’s extensive Congressional, Executive Branch and corporate experience is well-known within the Washington public policy arena,” said Robert Novick, the co-managing partner of WilmerHale, in a statement. “He is a dynamic addition and will add tremendous value for our clients who will be able to rely on his strategic judgment to coordinate and provide rapid responses to a growing number of regulatory and legislative issues.”

Lehman is also no stranger to the world of large law firms, having served as a principal at the advocacy arm of the international firm formerly known as Squire Sanders.

Lehman's resume stands to boost WilmerHale's lobbying revenue, which has grown to its highest levels in recent years. In the first three quarters of 2014, the shop brought in $2.23 million, compared with $1.44 million in all of 2013. Prior to that, it had struggled to bring in more than six figures.

Many of the firm's new clients were brought in by former Patton Boggs lobbyist Jonathan Yarowsky, who also served as an aide to former President Clinton and the House Judiciary panel.

Together, Yarowsky and Lehman will co-chair WilmerHale’s legislative affairs and public policy group.

“I am excited to join a firm with such an incredible reputation for professionalism and integrity,” Lehman said in a statement. “I have always been fascinated by the intersection of the private sector economy and public policy, and there is no better place to have such an impact than at WilmerHale. I am thrilled to co-chair the growing Legislative Affairs practice with the highly regarded Jon Yarowsky.”

The firm said in its release that Lehman would be working on legislative and regulatory advocacy in essentially all the various policy areas — including tax, technology energy, healthcare and homeland security. He will also bolster WilmerHale’s congressional investigation practice.