A few years ago, Southeast Alabama Medical Center and the Houston County Health Care Authority decided to seize an opportunity to build an osteopathic medical school in Dothan. That risk is paying off, as the Alabama College of Osteopathic Medicine has completed its first year of operations and is now laying the groundwork for future success.

“A little more than a year ago, we had no building and no staff,” said Dr. Craig Lenz, ACOM dean and senior vice president. “Look what we have now.”

Current Status

ACOM now has a new class of first-year students, doubling its student enrollment. The college is on track to provide third and fourth-year students with opportunities to work with doctors in a variety of specialties through clinical rotations throughout the state, as it has built a strong network of physicians willing to teach these students. ACOM also recently opened a research facility and hopes to begin contributing to the study of medicine.

Ron Owen, SAMC’s CEO and ACOM president, said the college is well on its way to performing its primary mission – creating a larger pool of physicians for the area.

“The main reason this college is here is because the board wanted to ‘grow our own,’ as we are hearing more every day about a national shortage of doctors,” Owen said.

ACOM is currently absorbing the Alabama Medical Education Consortium, an organization that helped connect third and fourth-year medical students with clinical rotation opportunities. Lenz said folding

AMEC into ACOM will help ensure ACOM students have wide access to a variety of opportunities for their clinical rotations.

SAMC is also working on developing a residency program, which will allow new doctors to finish the training they must receive after graduating ACOM. Owen said a residency program will help ACOM keep a larger portion of its graduates here in Dothan.

“Once they get here, we’re not going to lose them,” Lenz said. “A residency program increases our chances of retaining them permanently.”

Owen said the college is performing ahead of financial expectations, having reached its breakeven point ahead of schedule. Owen said the college has an $8 million operat i ng budget that is funded from tuition. The private, not-for-profit college charges about $43,000 per year in tuition to students.

Economic Contribution

According to a report prepared by Tripp Umbach, a national research firm, ACOM is expected to drive economic growth in the area. The college is predicted to have an economic impact of $111.9 million through 2015, with direct and indirect retail spending of more than $26 million.

Owen said the campus itself has created around 85 jobs and that the students drawn to Dothan are helping to fuel growth. A new hotel has been built near the campus, an apartment complex and other housing have been built and retail shopping developments are being built near the college.

Owen says one example of ACOM’s ability to contribute to Dothan’s economy is the large number of applicants the school brings to town to interview, as well as visitors brought to Dothan for events at the college. Owen expects more than 1,000 people to come to Dothan for an upcoming white coat ceremony, in which students obtain the privilege of wearing white doctor’s coats, an important symbolic milestone in their training.

With regard to health care availability and affordability, Dr. Stephen Miller, associate dean of clinical services, said ACOM’s presence will likely make health care more accessible in years to come. Miller said it likely will not drive health care prices down because of other factors influencing health care cost. Miller said the school might reduce health care costs to local residents in a roundabout way, as better access to care will help residents avoid developing serious illnesses.

Osteopathic Schools on the Rise

Osteopathic medical schools are on the rise as a strong demand for primary care physicians and the Affordable Care Act’s emphasis on community care create a fertile ground for these schools to grow throughout the country. According to the American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine, there are currently 30 osteopathic medical schools offering services at 42 locations in the U.S. A decade ago, there were only about 20.

In 2002, there were about 49,000 osteopathic physicians working in the U.S. Today, there are about 83,000 and by 2020, experts predict osteopathic physicians to number more than 100,000.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, by 2020, demand for primary physicians will grow by about 28,000 from 2010. The bureau is predicting a shortage of primary care doctors, particularly in rural areas. Miller said Alabama already has a shortage of about 400 doctors.

Dr. Stephen Shannon, president of the American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine, said the increased health care demands of a growing elderly population, along with the retirement of Baby Boomer doctors are fueling the demand for primary care physicians. The Affordable Care Act, which has a heavy emphasis in getting low-income people to see primary care physicians rather than go to the emergency room when they are ill, is also working to boost demand for primary care physicians.

Miller said osteopathic schools are well-suited to help fill the demand for primary care physicians. Miller said that philosophically, osteopathic medicine is more patient and people-oriented than allopathic medicine – the traditional MD program.

The growth in osteopathic schools has created some local competition for ACOM. Auburn University has opened an osteopathic school associated with the Edward Via School of Osteopathic Medicine on its campus and will begin training students next year. Owen said the Auburn school will create some competition for ACOM in terms of students and available slots in clinical rotations for third and fourth-year students, but that the high demand for medical school slots and the network of preceptors for clinical rotations ACOM has built puts the Dothan school in a position of strength.

“It’s here,” he said. “We’re going to compete. It will be fine.”

Looking Ahead

ACOM continues to grow and expand programs. The college’s research facility has received an $800,000 grant from the SAMC Foundation and school officials are working to determine what research the college is best suited to accomplish. The college is working with an interprofessional education program to let students from ACOM and nursing students from Wallace Community College to train together.

Lenz said the interprofessional training program is important because many of these nurses and doctors will likely work together one day and creating commonalities in their training will allow them to better cooperate in clinical, hospital or other settings.

The college also has a partnership with Troy University to allow ACOM students to obtain a master’s of business degree while they attend medical school. Lenz said the program will help new doctors gain the business skills they need to run successful practices. ACOM is currently forging a partnership with the University of Alabama at Birmingham to offer a master’s degree in public health as well.