Pastor Mary Overstreet Smith, shown at the Power House Temple Church May 16, 2014. (KOIN 6)

PORTLAND, Ore. (KOIN 6) — “Before there was Obamacare, there was Marycare.”

Multnomah County Commissioner Loretta Smith and others gave accolades to the woman who in 2005 sold her house — her “winterhome” in Glendale, Arizona — to bring more than 40 people living in Louisiana and Texas to Portland following Hurricane Katrina.

PHOTOS: see the celebration

Pastor Mary Overstreet Smith, 76, also helped start the North by Northeast Health Care Center, one of North Portland’s first health clinics, along with an autism center.

After decades of selfless work, the North Portland icon’s health is failing, and her congregation at the Power House Temple Church on North Williams Street wanted to show their appreciation for her while she’s still able to celebrate.

And celebrate they did. A full weekend of festivities kicked off at the church Friday night with speeches from African American Chamber of Commerce Director Roy Jay, former Senator Margaret Carter and others.

Remembering an icon

Overstreet Smith’s daughter recollected a time their house was flooded. Pastor Mary put on her fishing boots, put all the children in the neighborhood into a boat and paddled them to church. “Church started at seven. We were there by 6:45 — that’s my mother,” she said.

When former Senator Margaret Carter took the microphone and led the congregation in gospel songs, not a single person was left sitting. The guest of honor herself, Pastor Mary, threw herself into a dance-off with a Sunday-schooler. Anyone in the room would say she won.

As younger members of the congregation handed out fans while church-goers caught their breath, Carter said “if she had to sell her house to help the people of Portland, she would.”

“This woman did things as if she was the size of an 1,100 member church.”

Doing God’s work

But, Pastor Mary doesn’t see herself as a saint. Rather, a woman, guided by God, doing work that needs to be done.

“People have needs, and somebody has to do it,” she said. “I just like helping people.”

Being from the southern United States, Overstreet Smith grew up near the area hardest-hit by Hurricane Katrina. “Getting these people on airplanes, they had no I.D., they lost everything,” she said. “We don’t know what tomorrow’s going to bring.”

As for a weekend in her honor: “I’m always excited, I’m looking forward to just being able to be there.”

‘I will be there’

When Barrack Obama was first elected president, she called Lorretta Smith, then a staffer for Ron Wynden, to ask for tickets to the inauguration.

However, only people who would be in D.C. on the day of Obama’s inauguration were eligible for tickets through their state senator, to be picked up on Martin Luther King’s birthday.

“I will be in D.C. if I have to walk to D.C.,” Overstreet Smith answered.

“She had a Cadillac in D.C.,” said Smith.

“What Pastor Mary showed me is she kept her word: she said ‘I-will-be-there.'”

Celebrations will continue Saturday at 7 p.m. at the Power House Temple Church at 4525 N. Williams Ave., finishing off with Sunday service at 3 p.m., at the same location.