The neo-Gothic building on N. Broadway across from the Milwaukee School of Engineering was a hub of activity for the city that existed a century ago. Built in 1891, its first life was as the German-English Academy at a time when Milwaukee was known as the "most German city in America."

Several generations later, the former language academy is evolving into a different kind of learning center — a place that will help build Milwaukee's 21st-century innovation economy.

Expanding this summer into the second of the historic building's five floors is Direct Supply, the Milwaukee-based company that provides "senior living" services, equipment, software systems, building expertise and more to about 36,000 communities across the United States.

It's not a production facility in the classic sense, but a combined innovation center and accelerator that will incubate some of the best ideas coming from inside Direct Supply as well as ideas from young companies outside the firm.

With plans to accommodate about 250 employees and entrepreneurs within six years, the Direct Supply innovation center is the latest effort to build upon a natural cluster in Milwaukee: expertise in serving the needs of seniors and the providers who care for them once they move into assisted living centers or skilled-care facilities.

You've heard of Milwaukee's emerging water cluster and its power, energy and controls cluster. Welcome to the "senior living" cluster.

"We're very much committed to doing whatever we can to attract and create innovation in Milwaukee and the state of Wisconsin," said Tom Paprocki, director of development and innovation for Direct Supply. "We see our work here (in the innovation center) as contributing to that in many ways over time."

The building was nearing the end of its physical use when MSOE, which owns the property at 1020 N. Broadway, entered into a partnership with Direct Supply for its renovation. It's a two-way street because Direct Supply has access to MSOE interns and graduates, and MSOE has a proven landing spot for some of its graduates.

"It was a question of how do we attract the best and brightest," said Bill Avery, Direct Supply's executive vice president and leader of its technology services. "We felt a downtown location was the right fit for corporate culture reasons as well as a way for us to better contribute to the innovation economy here in Milwaukee."

Not only is the Direct Supply location in the old academy a stone's throw away from MSOE, it is close to other sources of talent at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Marquette University and the Milwaukee Institute of Art & Design.

About 80 people work on Direct Supply's renovated first floor and construction on a second floor is well underway. That's where the company will operate a "customer experience lab" and suites for in-house innovation as well as start-up suites for companies outside Direct Supply.

The idea is to create an environment in which companies working on some aspect of "senior living" innovation can work independently and collaboratively, depending on the need. It also brings software engineers and technicians from Direct Supply's main campus into a setting where they work as a team on solving customer problems.

The timing is right, say members of Direct Supply's innovation team, because the U.S. is facing unique demographic challenges and health care is rapidly changing — not just in hospitals and clinics, but within senior living settings.

Layer on the changes precipitated by the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, and the need to address questions of quality, safety, price and delivery is urgent.

"It's a great opportunity to solve problems that affect millions of people," Avery said.

If the plans unfold as scheduled, the Direct Supply innovation center will join a small club of accelerators in the senior living industry. Those include Aging 2.0 in San Francisco and Innovate LTC in Louisville, Ky., with Aging 2.0 focusing more on the consumer side. Aging 2.0 is tied to Formation Capital, a $6 billion private equity firm focused on senior housing and care and related real estate investments.

Direct Supply does not operate an early stage fund and has no plans to do so, but members of its innovation team hope to connect young companies to investors with which they have existing relationships. More important, Direct Supply hopes to help young companies by making space, technology and a talent-rich environment available.

"The innovation economy is still early in its maturity (in Milwaukee), and we want to be a part of contributing to that revitalization," Avery said.

What better location than a building that was a symbol of the city's past — and which is poised to become a part of its future.

Tom Still is president of the Wisconsin Technology Council. Its Wisconsin Innovation Network meets in Wauwatosa. Contact him at news@wisconsintechnologycouncil.com.