BOULDER — Safety Parker Orms held his Buffalo Heart Award almost as hard as linebacker Derrick Webb held his mother. The seniors were two of 15 who walked out of Folsom Field for the last time Saturday night, a mere spattering of the 36,005 left clapping for them in the cold.

The seniors left with bowl hopes dashed once again, the faces rubbed in the turf by another vastly superior Pac-12 opponent. This time, 23rd-ranked Southern California jumped to a 37-7 lead before settling on a 47-29 win.

In the big picture, Colorado (4-7, 1-7 Pac-12) stretched its school record to eight straight losing seasons. In the now, the picture the seniors will take with them through this last week of their careers, they will never play in a bowl game.

“It hurts,” said Orms who earned the award from fans for his playing through three years of injuries, including a stinger Saturday. “That’s college football right there. That was something that was a big goal of mine. I thought I’d be going every year and to not go to one kills me inside.”

For Webb, his career covered three head coaches, which almost matches the Buffs’ four Pac-12 wins since joining the league two years ago. But if coach Mike MacIntyre wants to build a foundation in this first year, these seniors are his first bricks.

“I wouldn’t say my career was empty at all,” Webb said. “It’s been a tough four or five years. I’ve learned a lot. I met a lot of great men. I participated at the highest level of college football.

“And I’ve had a lot of great wins here at Colorado. And there will be some great wins to come at Colorado, and I plan on coming back for some of those.”

When MacIntyre sits down at season’s end next weekend and sees the depths his program must climb to contend, he won’t have to look at the lack of size or lack of speed. He’ll just have to look at one figure: 50-18.

That’s the average score that Colorado has lost its seven league games.

USC (9-3, 6-2) is a prime example of the K2-sized challenges in the Pac-12. Fueled by four- and five-star recruits throughout the lineup, and jacked up by their love for interim coach Ed Orgeron, the Trojans systematically steamrolled the outmanned Buffs.

Sophomore Cody Kessler continued his steady rise in Trojan lore, hitting 19-of-28 for 184 yards and two touchdowns. Javorius Allen, one of a stableful of capable tailbacks, had 145 yards and three scores.

But defensively, USC looked like it channeled Pete Carroll ‘s national championship years. In building a 23-0 halftime lead, USC held Colorado to 73 total yards. Sefo Liufau was only 4-of-15 for 43 yards in those two quarters.

“That’s the best defense we’ve played all year,” Liufau said. “They rarely brought blitzes but they got a lot of pressure on us.”

Paul Richardson, about the lone Buff who gives opponents the shakes, didn’t get a reception against USC’s double teams until the Buffs were down 37-7 in the third quarter.

It was the second coldest game in USC history — 29 degrees at kickoff – but to the Trojans it seemed like another day at Manhattan Beach. They forced five straight punts to start the game. Then end Leonard Williams walloped Liufau on a sack and fellow end George Uko recovered the fumble at the Buff 20.

Four plays later, Allen slid in from the 1 for a 16-0 lead. Safety Dion Bailey then made a terrific sideline interception of Liufau, setting up Kessler’s 20-yard TD pass to Nelson Agholor for a relatively safe 23-0 lead.

Trojans freezing in the cold? USC may just be getting warmed up.

“I thought it was rather pleasant tonight compared to what we had heard it was going to be like,” Orgeron said.

The Buffs scored three TDs against the Trojan reserves in the fourth quarter to close to 40-29 with 3:19 left but USC recovered a particularly dangerous onside kick to all but end it.

Now the Buffs only have the battle of the South Division basement Saturday at Utah (4-7, 1-7) left. But to sophomore receiver Nelson Spruce, the Buffs have left more.

“This year we made incredible strides,” he said. “I think we are really on the verge of being able to compete in every game. It’s not looking like that on the scoreboard but we taking strides in the right direction.”

John Henderson: jhenderson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnhendersondp