PORTLAND — Only Crook County can make 327 points seem like just another number.

A far cry from the all-classifications record of 405.5 they set last season, the Cowboys rode four individual state champs to post the second-highest point total in OSAA history and earn a third straight Class 4A wrestling state championship Saturday night at Veterans Memorial Coliseum.

“We knew from seventh grade, the first practice, that we could do something great if we just stuck together and worked our butts off,” said Trevor Rasmussen, the 220-pound winner Saturday. “We did, and amazing things did happen. Coaches, from day one, were telling us we could be the greatest team ever in Oregon history. They weren’t wrong. They’re totally right.”

Crook County, which bested runner-up Henley by 161.5 points, powered to another team title, behind its seasoned seniors, a determined acrobat and a depth that could not go unnoticed.

The backflip

Hayden Bates had that celebratory backflip planned for some time.

A year after falling in the 132-pound state final, Bates came out strong against two-time defending champ Conner Noonan of Henley before holding on for a 5-4 victory and the 138-pound state title for Crook County.

“I worked hard all season long to get to this point. I wanted it so bad,” said Bates, noting how much motivation last year’s runner-up finish provided. “It’s all I thought about all year. It’s all I ever think about. It’s a dream come true. Since I was a baby, it’s everything I wanted. It means everything to me. Wrestling’s my life.”

The exclamation point

Trayton Libolt’s coaches have long instructed him to trust in his abilities, to believe that the strenuous work he put himself through this season would pay off, to wrestle with the confidence that a victory is in order.

That was exactly what Libolt did in the 126-pound final, and it came against former Crook County teammate Kurt Mode, now of Banks, as Libolt sealed a second consecutive and career-capping state title with a 7-3 win.

“It’s insanely emotional,” Libolt said. “I’ve been crying this whole time. I’m just honored to be a part of this team. It’s amazing … the best way you could end. I’m so glad I could end with that.”

Two other Cowboy seniors polished off their high school wrestling careers in similar fashion.

After two straight seasons of placing second, Crook County’s Gunnar Robirts defeated Austin Mitchell of Douglas 11-3 at 195 pounds to capture his first state title.

In the ensuing match, at 220 and in a rematch of last season’s championship final, the Cowboys’ Trevor Rasmussen pinned Scappoose’s Devin Ray in 5 minutes, 1 second for a second straight title.

“All the blood, sweat and tears I put into both of these (championships), you can’t count ’em,” Rasmussen said. “It’s a great feeling, and it’s way different from last year, definitely.”

The arsenal

Of the 20 wrestlers Crook County brought to Portland, 15 went on to place, including the four champions and five runners-up — Terran Libolt at 113 pounds, Cole Ovens at 145, Collbran Meeker at 152, Ryder Shinkle at 170 and Clark Woodward at 182.

Not only that, Trey Shores (132 pounds) and Brendan Harkey (160) each placed third for the Cowboys, while Cole Morgan took fourth at 106. Carson Raymond and Zach Smith finished fifth at 182 and 285, respectively, and Pacer Quire was sixth at 113.

“This team, my brothers that I get to go to war with every day, it’s a once-in-a-lifetime group of young men,” Rasmussen gushed. “There’s not another group I’d want to have been with the last four years.”

The legacy

The Cowboys rang up their third straight Class 4A team championship. And though no state records were set, there was no taking away from what Crook County accomplished, including the 327 points it piled up this weekend, which ranks second only to the 405.5 points the Cowboys scored here in 2014.

“What we did was amazing,” Rasmussen said of last season’s points record. “Even if it does get beat down the road, we’ll still know how much work we put in to get that record.”

“It’s not about the records,” Libolt conceded. “It’s just coming here and reaching your individual goal. All our Cowboys are just wrestling their hearts out. That’s all that matters.”

—Reporter: 541-383-0307, glucas@bendbulletin.com .