Pain: Kieren Jack and Adam Goodes after the match. Photo: Joe Armao

John Longmire sensed something was wrong as early as 10 minutes into the grand final but could not find a solution to prevent Sydney from suffering the heaviest grand final loss by a minor premier in the history of the game.

The Swans' losing margin of 63points eclipsed the previous mark of 57 suffered by Collingwood in 1926, and was the biggest losing margin of Longmire's coaching reign.

Sydney's biggest losses under Longmire, who started in 2011, have all come against the Hawks, whom they have beaten just once in five attempts since 2012.

Comprehensively outplayed, the Swans turned in their worst performance of the year in the most important game as every facet of their game disintegrated against Hawthorn's manic pressure.

Advertisement

Not since the final weeks of the Paul Roos era in 2010 have the usually miserly Swans conceded such a big score.

Skipper Jarrad McVeigh, who had 11 possessions, said he felt "disgusted", while Rhyce Shaw said "we let ourselves down really badly".

"The leaders didn't stand up, myself included. We didn't give a yelp," McVeigh said. "It's as bad a performance as we've had all year, and on the biggest stage. It's really, really disappointing."

A shattered Longmire could not find a winner for the Swans on Saturday night and said the biggest point of difference between the teams was their hardness.

"We didn't get much working for us at all; that's what good teams do," Longmire said.

"Hawthorn were able to play the game on their terms for the whole game and we were trying to get it back at different points but we didn't have any success at it.

"Normally we have an influence in the contest and we're able to, inside and outside, impact the game a lot better than we were today.

"We've taken it to the contest all year and didn't bring it today."

The Swans had aimed to lay 100tackles but fell well short with 57. They stuck just seven in the first term. "We looked at that in the first 10 minutes and thought whether it was getting our hands on the ball or pressuring the opposition when they had it by laying tackles or team defence; we didn't get any of those aspects right," Longmire said.

"When they put the foot down they kept it down and didn't let up, and whenever we got a goal they answered back and that's what good teams do.

"We didn't pressure the opposition when they had the ball, we couldn't get our hands on the ball. When we got it we coughed it up and when we didn't we missed tackles. We were on the back foot from the first bounce. We weren't able to arrest the game back at any stage."

Longmire refused to discuss what impact such a humiliating defeat would have on the psyche of his players, though preferred to see the loss as an aberration rather than a true reflection of his team.

"We played poorly today. To be fair, we've played some reasonable football at this point, up until today. We didn't do it today," Longmire said. "We'll come to work when the players have had their break, we'll roll the sleeves up and we'll go again. We can talk about what we're going to do but I'm a big believer in actually doing it. We come prepared to get better again."

Paying tribute to Hawthorn, Longmire said: "Any team which wins back-to-back premierships has to be considered a great team."