TV and Radio

Sam Pang.

Is Sam Pang the secret weapon of Australian television? An understated fellow, he has pottered about for years, hosting history quiz ADbc, quipping about the World Cup with Santo and Ed, providing commentary on Eurovision, and just generally bringing his genial presence to a variety of pleasant ventures, an injection of likeability wherever he goes.

On Have You Been Paying Attention? (Ten, 9.40pm), Pang acts, from one perspective, as the whipping boy for barbs from host Tom Gleisner and fellow regular Ed Kavalee regarding his abilities, or lack thereof, in the quiz and his less-than-stellar chances of victory. But really what he's there to do is be our friend, our proxy on the panel, the charming everyman who's smarter, funnier and handsomer than us by just enough to be entertaining without coming across as acerbic or smug – that's the job of the others.

HYBPA is ostensibly a quiz wherein various comedians and celebrities compete to see who can remember the most of the week's news, answering questions from Gleisner. Actually it's a show wherein various comedians and celebrities compete to see who can fire off the most zingers – most of the time, any attempt at the real answer to a question is preceded by a couple of the "contestants" buzzing in to deliver a one-liner, probably about reality shows.

As is so often the case, the show's raison d'etre is not its best point. The quips frequently come across as overscripted and forced, lacking the easy, natural air that should be present for what is set up as a knockabout late-night yukfest. That atmosphere is much more effectively generated when the guests loosen up and the focus moves from quickfire Holly-wood Squares-style gags to interaction between the contestants. When the stars snipe good-naturedly, exchange asides or blurt out their reactions to the bad and the mad of the headlines, everything feels a lot more relaxed and fun.

Advertisement

Which they have to, because this is a low-key show, valuable for the ease and cheapness of putting it together, and there's no point trying to act all professional about things – that's not why we're here.

In short, the show benefits the most when it behaves, as a whole, like Pang – I just want to hug him. Less cuddly is the panel of coaches on The Voice (Nine, 7.30pm), who continue to uphold their vows to ensure that no episode of the show be less than twice as long as it needs to be.

The vocal hopefuls are battling it out in the live showdowns, a tense and gut-wrenching stage during which every performance will be followed by the coaches telling barefaced lies about how good they were. Host Darren McMullen spices up proceedings by being inconspicuous and pretty unnecessary.