It's beginning to look a lot like Christmas.

President Barack Obama lights the National Christmas tree on Thursday and Bing Crosby and Nat King Cole are already crooning on the radio.

And up on Capitol Hill, a familiar Grinch is threatening to steal Christmas again.

"We may have to be here the week before Christmas ... and hopefully, not into the Christmas holiday," Majority Leader Harry Reid said on Monday, as the Senate convened with a packed agenda for the last rites of the 113th Congress.

It's not the first time that Reid has threatened to his colleagues with Yuletide overtime — in fact it's a familiar Reid tactic to concentrate the minds of his 99 fellow Senators when gridlock looms.

"It's going to be a very, very bad Christmas for a lot of people," Reid warned in December 2008, after the Senate rejected a $14 billion rescue package for crisis-hit car manufacturers.

The next year, Reid actually had his troops hard at work and voting on Christmas Eve as the Senate passed Obamacare.

Five days before Christmas in 2010, Reid was back to his old tricks, threatening to make his colleagues work.

"Last year, we were here at this time — up until Christmas Eve, I hope we don't have to do that this year."

Reid delivered his annual warning of fast-approaching Christmas early, on November 28, in 2011. A year later he jammed lawmakers with the approaching holiday in the third week in December.

And last year, Reid complained he had twice in his career had to leave the Senate on Christmas Eve — and hoped he wouldn't have to do so again.

For the record, Reid has only kept the Senate open on Christmas Eve once in his eight years as majority leader.

On Monday, Reid renewed his annual seasonal tradition by warning his colleagues "there are things we have to get done," before they get to go home for the holidays.

Next year won't be quite the same without Reid's annual Christmas cheer, as the Democratic Majority leader will cede control of the Senate to Republican Mitch McConnell in January.

Will you be a mean one Mr. McConnell?