Dr. Melissa Currie was among health experts who spoke Jan. 8 to lawmakers on the House Health and Welfare Committee, urging them to approve the panel’s request. (Photo: COURIER-JOURNAL FILE)

They meet every other month, spending hours in Frankfort poring over files that document the lives of Kentucky children who died, or were nearly killed, because of neglect or abuse.

In the 20 months since they were organized, this 20-member panel of doctors, social workers, attorneys, judges and others have waded through tens of thousands of pages in 114 case files.

But so far, the Child Fatality and Near Fatality External Review Panel has failed to make a single recommendation for how to improve a state system that has been harshly criticized for failing to adequately protect Kentucky's most vulnerable children.

Panel members say they underestimated the scope of the work, and say they need more time and money to hire staff to identify behavioral trends that might expose cracks in the system and prevent future tragedies where roughly a couple dozen children die a year from neglect and abuse.

"All of us who advocated for this panel were so focused on getting it started that, until we got in it, we didn't realize how much work was involved," said panel member Joel Griffith, director of programs and services for Lexington-based Prevent Child Abuse Kentucky.

Help may be on the way. This week, the state Senate is expected to vote on Beshear's proposed budget, which includes $420,000 for the review panel for each of the next two years — afunding plan thathas already been passed by the Democrat-controlled House.

"So far it's survived, from what I've seen," state Sen. Julie Denton, R-Louisville, a non-voting member of the panel, said of the allocation.

The panel hopes to use the money tohire a small staff of people with medical expertise, perhaps nurses, who could understand medical terminology in the files and provide abstractions, or succinct summaries of the various reports in them. That would be particularly helpful for panel members who are not trained in the medical field. Currently, a staffer from the state's Justice and Public Safety Cabinet prepares case files, but the panel otherwise has no staff.

Dr. MelissaCurrie, the head of the pediatric forensic division at the University of Louisville and a panel member, said she is "gtting accustomed to" the uncertainty of political decision-making, but is "very optimistic" about the promise of funding. "There seems strong support from legislators on the importance of the work we do," she said.

In the fiscal year that ended June 30, 2013, the panel examined 114 cases, and substantiated two-thirds of the 73 near-fatal cases were substantiated as involving abuse or neglect. They found that less than half the 41 fatal casesindicated abuse or neglect.

Often, a child's death simply involves a parent or guardian being careless, but not necessarily negligent or criminal. Others are simply accidents.

Some, however, are tragedies the panel considers preventable.

The landscape of children

The panel is required to meet quarterly, but meets every other month to better get through the paperwork.

At its Dec. 2 meeting, the panel discussed cases ranging from a child on a bike hit by a car, to a shooting, to a brain-injured woman with four children, one of whom died. Most cases involved drug abuse. The minutes are available on the Kentucky Justice and Safety Cabinet's website, where cases are only identified by assigned number. For example:

• Case F 05-13-C: A three-month baby dies of a head injury. A criminal case is pending. Panel notes involvement of alcohol and marijuana abuse. Case complicated by family moving from county to county. According to the minutes, panel member Sharon Currens, Executive Director of the Kentucky Domestic Violence Associationdescribes it asa complicated case, with indications of domestic violence.

• Case F 21-13-C: A child ingests the mother's medication, the second time a child in the same household has done so.

• Case F 16-13-C: A child dies of positional asphyxia with an intoxicated caregiver. The mother had sustained a childhood brain injury and has four small children. The minutes note that Robert Walker,a panel member and assistant professor with the University of Kentucky Center of Drug and Alcohol Research, said that brain injury is an issue that no one wants to deal with. Some medical records are missing from file.

• Case NF 34-13-C: A younger child is accidentally shot during a struggle over a gun between the mother and an older child. The case involves domestic violence, heavy alcohol use, and prescription drug use. The father is in prison for vehicular homicide.

The panel make some specific recommendations; for example, it sends thecase involving the mother with a brain injury for further analysis.

"We continue to plow through," Currie said. "We discussed support for new moms, nurse-visits, something, anything, for when it doesn't reach the level of DCPS (Department of Child Protective Services. The mom might have a mental illness, but there's no indication that she's a threat to the child. She just needs help. Without it, that leaves her with essentially nothing."

Some cases are just a few hundred pages. Others that involve multiple agencies are voluminous.

"One was over 1,000 pages," Currie recalled. "And another I reviewed on Monday was 730 pages.

Currie said that before beginning their work, panel members didn't "have a great sense of how much we'd be sifting through. I think I anticipated more summary documentation."

Denton, as a non-voting member, also acknowledges the complexities of case files, which now come to the panel completely unredacted by the Cabinet of Health and Family Services, which wasn't true initially.

"It's difficult to wade through those files first page to last," Denton explained. "Reading through social worker notes, for me that was helpful to understand who said what and when. But the medical part, that's pretty cut and dry."

It also can be dense, since it includes full reports from doctors, medical specialists, nurses and — in the case of fatalities — medical examiners.

Among cases of neglect or abuse, drug abuse among parents and guardians is common.

"We're focusing on neglect because it's true nationally and in Kentucky, the majority of kids who die, it's going to be neglect more often than abuse," Griffith said.

Following the money

The panel's creation was prompted, in part, by a controversy over the state Cabinet for Health and Family Services,which has been involved in a five-year legal battle with two Kentucky newspapers, including The Courier-Journal, over its refusal to release some records on child-abuse and fatality cases, and so heavily redacting other files that they were functionally non-public.

In December, a Franklin Circuit Court judge ordered CHFS to pay $756,000 in penalties in the case, and last week ordered it to pay an additional $301,000 in attorneys fees to the newspapers. The dispute hascost state taxpayers over $1 million.

Beshear created the panel by executive order on July 16, 2012, in the wake of several high-profile deaths of children in the state's adoption program. The plan was for the panel to recommend specific intervention improvements to CHFS,the Department for Community Based Services, and other state agencies.

A year later, theKentucky General Assembly passed House Bill 290 in the 2013 regular session, which codified the governor's executive order. But panel members said thatuntil this year's legislative session, they were hesitant to ask for any funding because they feared it would jeopardizethe panel's formation.

"All of us recognized early on... (that) seeking funding would have likely killed it," Currie said. "So we wanted to get it established first."

Nationally, there is a growing trend of not only establishing such review panels, and providing public funding for staff, according to Teri Covington, director of the National Center for the Review and Prevention of Child Deaths in Washington, D.C.

Thirty-seven states now have some panel system for tracking and analyzing children's deaths, with Colorado and Tennessee passing legislation last year. Indiana has a state-level system for analyzing child-death cases, but the information is gathered locally in some states.

"There's an increasing trend for states doing these, focusing on child fatalities," Covington said. "You can't do it without staffing. That's not realistic."

Covington traveled to Kentucky, and with Currie and other health experts on Jan. 8, made their case for funding to lawmakers on the House Health and Welfare Committee. They found a receptive audience.

"I can't see us turning that down," Rep. Tom Burch, a Louisville Democrat who heads the committee, said after the hearing. House Speaker Greg Stumbo also expressed support, but though he wasalso quick to mention the state's ongoing budget challenges.

A month later, in February, the governor submitted a budget proposal with full funding.

"Without the funding the panel will be unable to keep pace with the number of cases and effectively review the information we receive," said panel member Roger Crittenden, a retired Circuit Court judge. "Fatalities continue to occur after the creation of the panel but we hope that our review and recommendations will help prevent fatalities that are preventable."

If funding is secured, it still wouldn't materialize until the fiscal year begins in July. Then the panel will begin considering options for hiring a staff.

So while it's hopeful its second annual report next December will include specific recommendations, it's not a certainty.

Reporter Tom O'Neill can be reached at (502) 582-4653 and on Twitter @CJ_toneill.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1lZO4bk