When Unesco discovered what was happening, it immediately asked the Afghan government to order the work suspended, a decision seconded during heated debate in last December’s meeting of the Expert Working Group.

“Our priority has been to stabilize iconic elements of the World Heritage site that are unstable,” said Brendan Cassar of Unesco. “To make a good restoration when you haven’t addressed steps 1 to 9 is misplaced.”

Photo

The western niche remains in danger of collapse, he said, with rocks and stones falling regularly, partly a legacy of the high explosives the Taliban set to destroy the monuments. Pledges from donors to fund even that basic work have fallen short by at least $700,000, Mr. Cassar said.

“Unesco’s position is that restoration is a case of putting the cart before the horse,” he said. “We need to save all options for future generations.”

Professor Petzet argues that rebuilding the Buddhas would be no different from past efforts to reassemble parts of the Roman Forum — another project criticized by some archaeologists — or repair damaged mosaics after the earthquake in Assisi, Italy. “It’s something human to want to do,” he said. “In France, whole cathedrals were reconstructed in Gothic style after they were blown up by Protestants in the 1600s.”

He said, “I’ve talked with many Afghans, and they do not want that their children and grandchildren are forced by the Taliban to see only ruins.”

People who knew little else about Afghanistan knew that there was something amazing in this high mountain province, where the ancient Silk Road crossed the Hindu Kush, and where a sprawling Buddhist monastic complex flourished in the sixth century.

Photo

The monks sculpted cliffs hundreds of feet high, flattening their faces in order to build a network of monastic and ceremonial chambers within, with more than 1,000 of them in the area of the destroyed Buddhas. The larger standing Buddha was 174 feet high — the world’s tallest and taller than the Statue of Liberty. The smaller one still towered at 115 feet.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Connecting the caves and the niches where the Buddhas stood was a network of tunnels, staircases and passageways hollowed out of solid rock, much of which remains intact.

The Taliban were not the first Muslim visitors to savage the monuments; Islam forbids any form of idols, and successive conquerors turned their artillery on the niches. By the 20th century the Buddhas were heavily damaged and both were missing their wooden faces, said to have once had jeweled eyes with huge lanterns burning behind them at night.

During the war against Soviet occupation, mujahedeen commanders obliterated a sitting Buddha in the cliff with heavy artillery and looted many of the caves. Domed ceilings in some caves were desecrated; the fighters built scaffolding that allowed them to leave their muddy footprints on the ceiling, a move highly offensive to Buddhists.

The Taliban, however, brought a more systematic destruction to the approximately 1,500-year-old statues, planting high explosives throughout the niches in 2001, reducing the remaining statues to rubble and leaving the niches and many passageways unstable.

Photo

Professor Petzet maintains that his conservators have managed to preserve, identify and catalog as much as 30 percent of the surface of the smaller standing Buddha, enough, he says, to restore it persuasively.

But Unesco says other experts are not so sure of that figure, putting the amount of material recovered at about 10 percent.

“The point is, a very small percentage of the surface remains,” Mr. Cassar said. “Some pieces are the size of a car and some a grain of sand.” In addition, the type of sandstone from which the Buddhas were carved is highly unstable.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s a disaster that can never be put back together,” he said.

Abdul Ahad Abassi, head of monuments for the Afghan culture ministry, said the government formally requested that the smaller Buddha be rebuilt, and Unesco’s World Heritage Committee is studying the issue.

“In 10 years, the Expert Working Group has come to no final decision,” said Muhammad Asir Mubaligh, the Bamian deputy governor. “I know they have achieved some small things, but 10 years? The main problem is there hasn’t been a donor country to say, ‘We will pay for it.’ ”

South Korea recently announced a $5.4 million grant for the site, but it is earmarked to build a museum dedicated to Bamian’s ancient culture and to train Afghan staff. Rival Japanese and Italian proposals call for other museum and conservation projects in Bamian. None of the proposals include money for rebuilding the Buddhas.

“I say rebuild one of them to attract tourists, and one should remain like that to remind people what the Taliban did,” said Abdullah Mahmoodi of the Bamian Tourism Association. “The best way to protect our monuments is to make them valuable again.”