Sioux Falls, SD

Sioux Falls booming economy is visible in every section of town. And the numbers back up what we're all seeing in terms of new construction. The city is on target to shatter its pre-recession record for building activity this year at more than half a billion dollars.

From single family homes, to apartments, to new retail stores, even manufacturing plants, it all adds up to nearly $447 million dollars in construction for the year.

"It's going to go down in history as the largest year in the history of Sioux Falls for construction activity, Director of Planning and Building Services, Mike Cooper said.

Even bigger than the previous boom year of $523 million in 2007. That was before the recession hit.

"To think we could potentially hit over $500 million this year, in terms of building construction is just phenomenal," Cooper said in 2007.

Today, Cooper expects well over $500 million by year's end.

"I don't think the Sioux Falls economy is going to slow down," Cooper said.

And the city is expecting another $50 million dollars in building permits to come in in the coming months, with five of those projects being apartment complexes.

"That's going to have a significant impact on what we project as the new population number," Cooper said.

The city is hoping those new apartment buildings fill up with potential employees to fill all the jobs these new manufacturers and retailers and other businesses are bringing to town. The city says it's also working with the state's educational institutions to have the right training programs in place to turn out qualified workers.

"We're not working with projects that would add five or 50 jobs. We're working on projects that we can successfully land that want to hire 500 people with a single project, people with advanced degrees, chemical engineers. We have to meet that challenge or we won't continue to grow at the pace we've seen," Director of Community Development Darin Smith said.

The city says you can expect another major retail announcement for Dawley Farm Village, as well as some more downtown development, very soon.

And while the new Denny Sanford Premier Center tops the list as the most expensive project this year, the city says by year's end it will only account for fiver percent of the total amount of building permit values.