Vixens wing defence Kate Moloney in action. Photo: Grant Treeby

After two wins have come two unexpected losses, the latest a 49-44 failure against surprise ladder leaders the Waikato Bay of Plenty Magic. After consecutive home defeats, the Melbourne Vixens now face three weeks on the road. After round four, Vixens coach Simone McKinnis has not just a few things to think about, but many.

"It throws a really big challenge at us from here on in, and I think as a team, as a coach, we've got to take that challenge on. We've really got to step up to it, what's thrown at us now,'' McKinnis said. "We've really got to make the most of it from here."

The previous Sunday, the Vixens had led at every change against the Queensland Firebirds, before being pipped by a goal. On Sunday, they trailed the Magic at each break, had 10 fewer scoring shots and lost by five, as McKinnis tried three shooting combinations in vain to curb the influence of MVP Grace Rasmussen at wing attack.

What was the problem?

Advertisement

"I think defensively we weren't as strong as we have been,'' said McKinnis. "We weren't getting turnover ball and we weren't getting turnover ball through the middle, but I also think execution, basic errors, passing, dropped balls, shooting into rejections, that sort of thing."

McKinnis had stuck with her starting seven from rounds two and three, but it was the injection of veteran recruit Cath Cox into the goal circle for the last 20 minutes that the coach nominated as one of the few positives for the Vixens, who now meet the Tactix, Firebirds and Swifts away and then Thunderbirds back at Hisense Arena.

Cox had been given the nod in the first game, before being benched in the second quarter, and then received only junk minutes in round two and none in round three. This time, she was introduced in an all-talls partnership with Karyn Bailey (18/19), and then tried with the zippier Tegan Caldwell 16/19), before finishing with 10 from 13 attempts herself.

McKinnis admitted she had considered making the substitution earlier, but had seen hints that the Vixens had found their rhythm, and decided to persevere. To Cox's credit, though, the 37-year-old was not complaining about the frustrations of being largely a bench-warmer in her four-game Vixens career after all these years and 108 Tests.

"Oh look, it is what it is,'' said the former Diamonds vice-captain, who is still vying for Glasgow Commonwealth Games selection. "I'm not gonna bitch and whinge because I'm not on the court. It's a tough decision as a coach and when you've got players that are working well, and playing well together, you wouldn't change it."

McKinnis backed young wing defence Kate Moloney to rebound from her failure to contain Rasmussen in the first half, but felt the second-year midcourter had returned stronger after a quarter on the bench. "Kate's a great kid, and she'll do anything she can to be better at what she did... and she'll learn from that. But it did hurt us, big time."

As for the Magic, the team unloved by the pundits in a pre-season that involved nine changes of personnel and the appointment of Australian coach Julie Fitzgerald now heads the ladder with a 4-0 record - equal with the reigning champion Thunderbirds - and a healthy percentage.

"To get a win over the Vixens at any time of the season is invaluable - they are a class act,'' Fitzgerald said. "To get a win in Australia for us is very valuable."