In wartime, democracies face a paradox: we fear the very rights and freedoms we cherish most might be turned against us by our enemies.

So how do we protect national security without threatening our individual rights? During the War on Terror, which entered a new and ominous phase in Iraq this summer, we have struggled to find a satisfactory answer. But we are not the first generation of Canadians to face the paradox.

On Aug. 22, 1914, a little over two weeks into the Great War, Canada's Parliament quickly passed the War Measures Act. This unusual piece of legislation suspended civil liberties and gave the prime minister and his cabinet far-reaching powers for the duration of the war and, at a stroke, made our democracy unrecognizable.

Censorship was imposed on the press and telegraph system while the free transportation of people and goods ceased. The act allowed Canadians to be searched, arrested and detained and their property seized without warrants, trials or compensation. It also gave the prime minister near dictatorial powers, allowing him to govern by a type of decree called an order in council, which was not subject to normal parliamentary oversight.

In the view of many Canadians, these regrettable measures were necessary to protect the nation against sabotage or acts of terrorism by German or Austro-Hungarian immigrants. By 1914, several hundred thousand people from these countries had been enticed to immigrate to Canada by promises of cheap land as well as religious and political tolerance. But in 1914, the government feared that the Central Powers might mobilize a fifth column to wage guerrilla warfare.

In places like Berlin, Ont., German citizens, many of whom had been in Canada for generations, found themselves living under a cloud of suspicion. As a direct consequence, in 1916 the city changed its name to Kitchener, in honour of the fallen British war hero and British secretary of state for war.

In hindsight, fears of widespread sabotage appear as nonsense, but in the crisis of the moment it seemed justifiable to brand many recent immigrants as enemy aliens.

Over the next four years, roughly 80,000 were arrested, paroled, and forced to register with the government on suspicion of enemy activity, many denounced by their neighbours for trivial acts such as making unpatriotic statements or keeping a shotgun on their farms against the regulations.

By war's end, more than 8,000 had been interned in remote prison work camps where more than one hundred actually died. Most of these "enemy alien" internees were indeed born within the borders of Austria-Hungary, but most had few lingering loyalties as they had immigrated to Canada in order to flee religious or ethnic persecution in the first place. Today, few Canadians realize that some of our most famous western national parks were built by forced labour.

Fear is a powerful thing, and the War Measures Act made English-speaking Canadians of British ancestry feel safer. While dissenting voices were few in 1914, J.K. Kerr, a prominent Toronto lawyer and senator for Ontario, warned that the act went "pretty far" and "in places where feeling runs pretty high, where there is any particular religious embitterment arising out of any act that has been done in this country" people might come to abuse its powers. He was right.

By war's end and even after (the act was only repealed in 1920), the state came to use its new powers in ways which no one could have imagined that first August.

Both ethnic and labour newspapers were shut-down and suspect book publishers closed. Aboriginal reserve lands were seized and turned into military training areas. Strikes were first restricted and then banned. The government even tried to deport British-born labour leaders in 1919 as enemy aliens, a category that had now grown to include all those who might harbour "alien" values, whatever those were.

Tragically, the act also gave the government the power to deploy soldiers to quell civil disobedience, and on Easter Monday 1918, Canadian soldiers opened fire with machine guns on anti-conscription protesters in Quebec City, killing at least five people and wounding more than 150. All this was done in the name of freedom and honour.

The War Measures Act would be proclaimed twice more in the 20th century, by prime minister William Lyon Mackenzie King during the Second World War, and again by prime minister Pierre Trudeau during the October Crisis of 1970.

Today, it has been replaced by the Emergencies Act, but we should remember that our rights and freedoms can also be eroded gradually by less sweeping pieces of legislation that are still proposed in the name of security.

The experience of the Great War reminds us of the perils of fighting wars in the name of freedom abroad while restricting civil liberties at home. In doing so, we risk destroying the very values we claim to defend.