Declining HSA Contributions Connected to ACA?

A recent survey finds employers are scaling back their contributions to employees' health-savings accounts, but experts differ over the effect the nation's new healthcare law has had on such accounts.

Employer contributions to health savings accounts are decreasing and, according to a recent study, that trend could in part be related to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Indianapolis-based United Benefit Advisors reports in its annual Health Plan Survey that in 2014, employees saw a 10-percent decrease in their average single health-savings-account employer contribution from the previous year, from $574 in 2013 to $515 in 2014.

On the employee contribution side, average family contributions also decreased seven percent during the same period, from $958 to $890. UBA survey results also reveal a correlation between enrollment in HSAs and Consumer Driven Health Plans (CDHPs), linking higher HSA contributions to increased enrollment in the cost-saving plans.

"Employer HSA funding strategies have changed in recent years in response to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and its impact on employer-sponsored health insurance plans," says Les McPhearson, UBA's CEO.

When HSA products were new, McPhearson says, employers could take insurance premium savings and fully fund the deductible. Today, however, premium reductions are much smaller. As premiums increase, employers naturally opt to put their contributions toward premiums first and, as a result, slowly reduce their HSA funding to the point where it could entirely become the employee's responsibility in some cases.

McPhearson adds that, while the ACA has had impact in many areas, it has not slowed the growth rate of healthcare insurance premiums. In addition, he says, there are many additional factors that will impact an employer's HSA contribution strategy, including deductible amount, employee premium contribution, out-of-pocket maximum and whether there are other types of plans offered.

When high-deductible consumer driven health plans (CDHPs) emerged more than a decade ago, premium savings of CDHPs compared to HMOs and PPOs were fairly dramatic. Employers also could take those savings and redirect the dollars to HSA contributions. Over the years, however, that gap has narrowed considerably and the ACA has contributed that trend with its new underwriting rules around pre-existing conditions, age banding and rating criteria.

"Increased premiums have [occurred] and that has helped accelerate the narrowing of the gap between PPOs and HMOs and CDHPs," McPhearson says.

Looking ahead, he says, it's likely the trend will continue, especially in smaller group market where many employers took the opportunity to renew non-ACA compliant plans, which was allowed by the law, so they didn't have to deal with the issue right away. But they will as the ACA goes into full effect.

Another ACA-related issue, the so-called Cadillac tax, does not take effect until 2018 but will impact specific regions or industry segments (or both) who, due to competitive talent challenges, have offered extremely generous healthcare benefits. Basically, the Cadillac tax is a 40-percent excise tax on the health benefits companies provide their workers above a certain threshold. For example, the tax will hit health insurance and related benefits at specific values (more than $10,200 for singles and $27,500 for families). Many specifics of the Cadillac tax are yet to be determined by the IRS.

Affected employers will need to decide on whether to pull back on contributions to offset expected tax costs resulting from that aspect of the ACA.

McPhearson adds that, over the next 12 to 24 months, many small- to medium-sized employers will begin to feel and experience the full impact of the ACA, which large group employers have already felt.

In fact, Karen Marlo, vice president, benchmarking and analysis, at the Washington, D.C.-based National Business Group on Health, which represents large employers, says that, among NBGH members, it's hard to say there is a direct correlation of lower employer HSA contributions with the ACA.

For one thing, she says, most large employers had implemented CDHPs early on, hoping to turn employees into astute healthcare consumers. And to do that, they tried to be as generous as possible with their contributions. The expectation was that employers would pull back as employees built up HAS funding.

"From what we've seen, there has not been a huge drop in employer contributions since the ACA became law. Anecdotally, employers have helped with the transition to CDHPs and now may be cutting back a little, but not at a high level," she says.

Marlo agrees that, with the Cadillac tax looming in 2018 and IRS rules dribbling out slowly, large employers are trying to figure out how the excise tax will hit them, which could mean a change in contributions to HSAs.

"From that perspective, the Cadillac tax could be a connection between the ACA and HSA contributions decreasing," she says.

Newsletter Sign-Up: Benefits

HR Technology

Talent Management

HR Leadership

Inside HR Tech

HRENow

Special Offers

Email Address



Privacy Policy

Mark Holloway, director of the compliance services practice at Lockton Companies in Kansas City, Mo., says the ACA has done a lot of good things, but it has not held down the cost of medical insurance. So employers are budgeting how much they want to spend and, with costs running high, it could impact how much money they put into HSAs.

As for the Cadillac tax, it could push down the value of a healthcare plan, and the first thing an affected employer might do is cut down on HSA contributions. But, since that aspect of the ACA is still three years away, most employers today are actively studying ways to get under the tax, he adds. There also are political rumblings that the tax will be changed before 2018.

"Since it doesn't apply yet, it's a stretch to say employer HSA contributions are down because of the Cadillac tax," he says.

Marlo says the best thing HR and benefits leaders can do is pay attention to surveys such as the UBA report to ensure they are at least comparable with peers when it comes to HSA contributions.

"They need to see if they are in line with what others are doing, or totally out there-being either too generous or too stingy," she says.

Holloway also advises that all employers continue to do what they can to aggressively manage costs. For example, smaller and middle market companies might consider taking a look at self-funding, typically a large employer strategy that can help maximize benefits budgets.

"The employee benefits space in general and healthcare benefits specifically have become much more complicated," says McPhearson, adding that, even if employer HSA contributions are reduced, the employers that are successful in attracting and developing top talent will continue to view benefits as a partnership with employees, and that requires astute planning and budgeting on the employers' part. But it also requires a continued focus on equipping and educating employees to be more sophisticated choosers and users of healthcare.

"It's a greater burden for employers, but those who do it well can have a dramatic impact on talent and engagement," he says. "Delivering the tools and educational resources to employees is critical. CDHPs don't work as just a cost-shifting alternative."

Send questions or comments about this story to hreletters@lrp.com.