Childhood fractures are common, especially among boys. Even so, the injuries are rarely treated correctly in emergency rooms, new research shows.

The most frequent problem is the splint — the combination of fabric wrap and rigid material used to stabilize a broken bone.

A pediatric orthopedic team at the University of Maryland School of Medicine examined the splinting technique used in 275 young patients, who averaged 8 years old. In 93 percent of the cases, the injury had been wrapped improperly, according to a study presented at the American Academy of Pediatrics conference in San Diego.

The orthopedic team found that often the splints were too tight or that an elastic bandage mistakenly was applied directly to the skin, the study said. As a result, researchers saw swollen fingers, blisters and skin ulcers. Sometimes children experienced pain far from the site of the fracture because incorrect splinting had put pressure on nerves. In half the cases, the splints were the wrong size — either too long or too short.

That meant bones were either too immobilized or insufficiently supported.

The splinting mistakes did not result in major complications that required surgery, but the issue, nonetheless, should be addressed, said Joshua M. Abzug, the study’s lead author and a pediatric orthopedist and assistant professor at University of Maryland.

“I still feel strongly that this is not acceptable,” Abzug said. “There’s a proper way to do a splint and even if there are minor complications, doctors and health care workers should do everything in our power to avoid them.”

Mininder Kocher, a pediatric orthopedic surgeon at Boston Children’s Hospital and a professor of orthopedic surgery at Harvard Medical School, said the results of the Maryland study were, unfortunately, not surprising.

“It mirrors what we see,” he said.

An estimated 42 percent of boys and 27 percent of girls get a fracture at least once by the age of 16, although some researchers estimate the percentage of fractures among children is even higher. Despite the pervasiveness of childhood fractures, Kocher said, pediatricians receive minimal training in how to apply splints.

“There’s a disconnect between what they’re getting in training and what they need to do in their practice,” he said.

Pediatricians usually decline to put splints on their patients, instead sending children for X-rays and referring them to an orthopedist.

In the latest study, children arrived at the pediatric orthopedic clinic after being referred from dozens of different emergency rooms or urgent care centers around the state, Abzug said. The most common cause for the injuries, he said, was children falling and then landing on outstretched hands.

The team members photographed the incorrectly wrapped splints, noted the injuries, and provided appropriate care.

Both Abzug and Kocher emphasized the importance of better training for emergency room personnel who see these injuries.

Abzug is developing posters about the correct placement of splints, which he hopes will be widely distributed in emergency rooms and urgent care centers.