Republican presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson emphasized a need for more aggressive foreign policy Thursday during a Dallas visit, likening current U.S. efforts to a mismanaged third-grade classroom.

Addressing dozens of guests at a World Affairs Council forum, Carson criticized the Obama administration’s response to the threat of the Islamic State radical militant group. He blamed the administration’s withdrawal of American troops from Iraq for its rise.

“We had essentially won that war, and we gave it away,” Carson said of the withdrawal.

Carson, a retired neurosurgeon best known for his work in separating twins conjoined at the head, called the Islamic State an “incredible threat to us” and noted a recent rise of cyberattacks from China and North Korea on the U.S.

He said such attacks should be combated with an aggressive strategy that can quickly disable cyberopponents while also offering time to repair any damage. His foreign policy suggestions echoed a similar ambition, and much of his focus remained on taking a more assertive stand against known enemies.

“We ought to be developing our capabilities of doing things to [cyberattackers] as well,” Carson said. “We ought to be at the forefront.”

He also suggested the Israeli-Palestinian conflict could be solved by giving Palestinians a home in Jordan or Egypt, though he acknowledged he has never been to Jordan. He said he has been to Egypt twice.

Carson reiterated his view that the Affordable Care Act has hurt U.S. health care, and he reaffirmed his belief in the implementation of health savings accounts for every citizen as a possible solution. Though he did not offer specific details on how the accounts would function, he called for more personal responsibility rather than dependence on the government.

According to a national Quinnipiac University poll released Thursday, Carson is one of five Republican candidates leading the GOP race, each polling at 10 percent. He is ranked with former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker.