Lights, Eric Decker. Camera, Jessie James. Action, Wesley Woodyard.

A few hours after the Broncos-Eagles game in Denver is finished Sunday, the E network will debut the reality TV show “Eric & Jessie: Game On.”

The show features Decker, a Broncos wide receiver, and his wife, a country and pop singer, in the weeks leading up to their wedding in June.

“I’m not nervous about it,” Decker said Friday in the locker room at Broncos headquarters. “I decided to do it, so why be nervous? I realize it might change as far as going out and doing things. But we still feel like normal people.”

How the public perceives the couple’s show is one thing. What the guys in the locker room think about it is another. There’s a pretty good chance Decker will be unmercifully ribbed.

“I will say Woodyard is in the first (episode),” Decker said with a smile, referring to one of his best friends on the team and Denver’s starting middle linebacker. “So if junk is getting passed around, we’re going down together.”

The show premieres Sunday at 8 p.m.

Champ, Duke questionable. Meaning zero disrespect to a 12-time Pro Bowl cornerback, the Broncos have become accustomed to playing without Champ Bailey this season. It is Duke Ihenacho’s ankle injury that might cause the Denver defense to make a significant adjustment.

Ihenacho didn’t participate in the Broncos’ two full practices this week, though he was out there on a limited basis Friday. Ihenacho, a first-year starting safety, has brought a Brian Dawkins-like presence to Denver’s defense this season.

Ihenacho and Bailey will be game-time decisions Sunday. There seemed to be more optimism earlier in the week about Bailey playing against the Eagles.

Luckily for the Broncos, they have able replacements for both players. Cornerback Tony Carter has recovered from his ankle injury. And strong safety Mike Adams made 17 starts last season.

Elsewhere on the Denver injury report, linebacker Paris Lenon was listed as doubtful to play Sunday because of a strained quad and tight end Joel Dreessen (knee) was upgraded to questionable.

Protecting the protector. Adam Gase took the blame for the sack that left tackle Chris Clark gave up late in the third quarter Monday night against Oakland.

Gase, the Broncos’ fast-starting offensive coordinator and play caller, said he should not have put Clark in position to get beat by Raiders defensive end Lamarr Houston, who not only sacked quarterback Peyton Manning but forced a fumble too.

“That was a ball holder,” Gase said, meaning the play called for Manning to spend an extra second to look into the end zone for a receiver on the first-down snap from Oakland’s 13-yard line. “We didn’t need it, and that would be one where I’d want to take back because our guys, if we put them in the right positions, they make it work. I feel like on that play (with) that play call, I didn’t put them in the right position. That one bothers me and that’s one that I’m going to make sure doesn’t happen again.”