Related Articles In Buffalo, an end to deadly opiate overdoses is nowhere in sight ADVERTISEMENT

Chris was ready for rehab. ¶ The 21-year-old opiate addict and alcoholic believed he needed to go into an inpatient program to get clean and sober. ¶ But he was turned down because he was too clean. ¶ “Multiple counselors told me that insurance companies don’t want to spend the money on inpatient treatment unless you’ve failed at outpatient,” said Chris, who shared his story on the condition of anonymity. ¶ Chris balked at the idea of purposely getting high so he’d be accepted into an inpatient program. He fought back and managed to convince his insurance company that inpatient treatment was his best hope. ¶ New federal and state laws going into effect this year should end policies that require an addict to fail at outpatient treatment before being placed in an inpatient program. ¶ But the scenario also illustrates a rift in the medical and insurance community about what the most effective treatment is for heroin and opiate addiction – inpatient or outpatient. ¶ And this rift is occurring as an epidemic of heroin and opiate addiction sweeps the Buffalo community and the nation. In Erie County alone, 78 people died from heroin and other opiate overdoses in the first eight months of 2014, according to the county Health Department. ¶ Some say the dispute over treatment is about money. Inpatient care, which lasts one to six months, can cost as much as $30,000 per month. ¶ Outpatient care costs only $200 to $300 per week. Those who favor inpatient treatment say insurance companies are pushing the less costly alternative as they grapple with an epidemic of opiate addiction. Some researchers say it’s not that simple, citing studies that show that while patients who receive inpatient care are more likely to stay clean for the first few months after treatment, the numbers later level out. “The added benefit of inpatient treatment wears off,” said Robert G. Rychtarik, a senior research scientist at the University at Buffalo’s Research Institute on Addictions. But he added that there is evidence that when an individual’s treatment preference is taken into consideration, positive outcomes can result. “Individuals with strong expectations that inpatient will work for them appear to do much better when assigned to inpatient rather than outpatient,” he said.

Insurance role influential Inpatient rehabilitation for a month or more used to be standard practice for drug addicts and alcoholics. “I can remember facilitating an admission to a rehab by only having documentation that the individual had insurance,” said Donald J. McHenry, a chemical dependency counselor and licensed interventionist. But insurance companies generally steer patients to start with outpatient treatment because so many people are addicted to prescription opiates and heroin. New York State estimates that medical treatment for heroin increased by 136 percent from 2004 to 2013. “Insurance companies realized a more cost-effective approach would be to start people at a lower level of treatment,” McHenry said. Inpatient care involves detoxification, which can last several days, followed by a stay in a rehabilitation facility that in the past lasted 28 days, although now it can be trimmed back to a week or less if an insurance company determines the individual shows signs of stability. Following rehab, residential treatment provides intensive assistance in preparing addicts and alcoholics for life on the outside. That takes three months or more.

Probability of recovery By contrast, outpatient treatment involves one-on-one counseling and group therapy sessions in addition to support from attendance at 12-step meetings, structured closely to addiction recovery programs for alcoholics. Within the drug-treatment community, many agree that opiate addicts are a different kind of addict. Highly addictive prescription painkillers act swiftly in rewiring their brains, magnifying the intensity of the addiction compared with other substances. The potency of pharmaceutically manufactured opioid prescription painkillers has been a game-changer in what type of treatment works, said Claudia P. Ragni, a 30-year veteran of the drug-treatment community and operator of two Long Island outpatient treatment centers. “Up until the current opiate-heroin epidemic started around 2000, intensive outpatient treatment worked 85 percent of the time. But with the epidemic, inpatient is the most appropriate starting point for a course of treatment,” Ragni said. “My experience is the longer they’re in inpatient, the higher the probability of achieving recovery.” Within a couple of months of abusing prescription painkillers, Chris said, he was hooked. “It’s like you know when you’re dying,” he said of the pull opiates had on him. “I needed to learn a new way of life. Before I got help, I would wake up in the morning needing something just to feel normal.” That, Chris said, made it impossible for him to continue in college on an athletic scholarship for golf. Many treatment experts believe that intensive inpatient care should be the starting point for opiate addicts. In residential treatment, away from the temptations of the outside world, addicts can rebuild their lives in a supportive and instructive setting, according to Anne D. Constantino, president and CEO of Horizon Health Services, one of the Buffalo Niagara region’s biggest providers of addiction treatment and mental health services. “Once a patient is stabilized,” Constantino said, “then outpatient is appropriate.” But there is no evidence to support inpatient treatment as being more successful, said Dr. Judith A. Feld, a medical expert at one of the region’s biggest health insurers. “There has been a cultural belief that inpatient rehab has been the treatment of choice, but it really hasn’t held up in truth with better treatment outcomes,” said Feld, Independent Health’s medical director for behavioral health. “It is hard to change those beliefs quickly.”

‘Not fully understood’ Removing someone from where he or she lives to residential treatment is only a temporary fix, Feld argues. “The evidence does support that people do much better in long-term, well-planned treatment in their community because a few weeks of being outside your environment does not really contribute to the lasting improvement of a patient’s ability to achieve abstinence or a better way of living,” she said. “That is the real goal because everybody can’t just take off.” Definitive recovery rates of what works best for various addictions are hard to come by because so many circumstances affect treatment: the individual’s attitude in seeking recovery, cognitive levels, psychiatric issues, socioeconomic circumstances and the different treatment settings. “To date, the combination of these factors and their implications for stable recovery are not fully understood,” said Rychtarik of UB’s Research Institute on Addictions. Yet health insurers, in their efforts to economize, may be making decisions that are not in the best interests of addicts, Rychtarik said. “The continued push for less-costly care and studies with selected samples often are used to justify denial of inpatient/residential treatment to individuals who might benefit most from it,” he said. “Reviewers of this research suggest that the pendulum has probably now swung too far in the direction of outpatient-only treatment.” Experts in the treatment community and relatives of the addicted are hopeful a new day is beginning under the federal Affordable Care Act. As of last July, it requires insurers to provide parity in treatment for addicts and mental health patients, just as if they were heart or cancer patients. New York State also has adopted a parity law and other measures aimed at eliminating the practice of requiring addicts to fail at outpatient treatment before moving on to inpatient care. In addition, if insurance companies deny claims for individuals who have been admitted to detoxification facilities, patients can appeal the decision and be allowed to remain in detox while the denial is challenged with the insurer required to pay the costs of the continued care. That was not the case previously. Univera Healthcare’s criteria for determining the level of care for substance abusers is based on nationally recognized standards, company spokesman Peter B. Kates said. “Like any benefits, coverage is subject to medical necessity, which is based upon evidence-based national criteria,” he said. BlueCross BlueShield established a pilot program in 2011 for extended residential treatment, prior to the mandated regulations for parity that began last summer, said Gretchen F. Fierle, senior vice president for marketing and communications. “Medical necessity will determine approval of and length of residential stays,” Fierle said. At Independent Health, a combination of factors plays into what level of care is provided, Feld said. “Our decisions are always made on medical and clinical information. It is not based on service cost being less expensive or more expensive. It is based on what the patient needs, and we always consider the patient’s interest and motivation,” Feld said.

Spending tens of millions The cost to local taxpayers for Medicaid-funded managed care programs in treating drug addicts is in the tens of millions of dollars. In the last five years, Erie County has spent more than $135 million funding the treatment of drug addicts and alcoholics who are indigent. In Niagara County, that figure was more than $30 million for the same period. How much do local health insurers spend for addicts with private insurance policies? Insurers declined to release the costs, but agreed money spent helping addicts recover is worthwhile. And failing to provide proper treatment ends up costing society even more, treatment community officials say. For Chris, the college athlete who sought help on his own, there is no question that inpatient treatment contributed to his success, he said. Sitting on the porch of an “Oxford House” he shares with eight other men dedicated to living drug- and alcohol-free in Niagara County, Chris said the inpatient rehab and the three months he spent at Horizon Village in Sanborn provided him with the intensive level of care he needed.