Video

Image Prominent gay rights hails Pope as their 'Person of the Year' 1:14 Play video America's oldest gay rights magazine honors Pope Francis on his 77th birthday by naming him 'Person of the Year.' Gavino Garay reports.

AS Pope Francis prepares for his first midnight mass, Catholics will no doubt reflect on his achievements in his first year not least of all bringing back humility, respect and energy to the institution.

It's hard to quantify his success.

What price for example can one put on the image published around the world of the pontiff giving a genuine embrace of affection to a disfigured man covered in boils?

Pope tops Time poll Time magazine has announced Pope Francis as their person of the year. Josh Wall has a look at some of the other contenders.

But while his words at the mass will undoubtedly resonate with the world's 1.2 billion Catholics it is what is going on behind the scenes that will prove the pontiff's mettle.

Behind closed doors yesterday he put his deputies on notice on what is to come.

Last week the Vatican announced yet another outside organisation would be granted unprecedented access to the files of the high church in a continuing program to bring it up to date with a modern organisation.

While Francis will take care of the faith the US-based consultancy firm McKinsay & Co will overhaul communications within the Holy See to make them "functional, effective and modern" and better sell or at least coordinate the message.

"The consultancy project will aim to provide the (Pontifical) Commission with the information needed to make appropriate recommendations to the Holy Father," a spokesman said.

Pope Francis attacks huge salaries and wealth gap In his first peace message as pontiff, Pope Francis said huge salaries and bonuses are symptoms of an economy based on greed. Sarah Irwin reports.

That announcement followed another on the appointment of accountancy firm KPMG to join with London-based Ernst & Young which is already looking at the management of the economics of Vatican City. The Netherlands-based Promontory Financial Group has also been appointed to overhaul the scandal-ridden Vatican Bank, a move some commentators said could make the pope a target for the mafia which is long suspected of having had a silent hand in the Vatican's finances.

Throwing a light on the inner workings of the Vatican, a closed community for centuries has upset many insiders. Yesterday the pope delivered his Christmas message to the Curia, the Vatican central government, and put them on notice. It was iron first in velvet glove stuff. They all faced mediocrity, gossip and bureaucratic squabbling if they forget that theirs is a vocation to the service of the church. He wants less moralising and more shows of mercy to the needy and greater support for the bishops.

"When professionalism is lacking, there is a slow drift downwards toward mediocrity," he told the Curia. "Dossiers become full of trite and lifeless information, and incapable of opening up lofty perspectives. Then too, when the attitude is no longer one of service to the particular churches and their bishops, the structure of the Curia turns into a ponderous, bureaucratic customs house, constantly inspecting and questioning, hindering the working of the Holy Spirit and the growth of God's people."

He also said the Vatican had to stop the gossiping, ironically on his appointment of the four outside agencies and what their brief is.

Pope Francis, who was appointed in March, has already show what happens last week reshuffling his deputies including the advisory body of the powerful Congregation for Bishops, that vets all the world's bishop nominations. Two key figures were axed.

Early next year the pope is expected to name his first batch of cardinals and in February preside over the third summit of his "Group of Eight" cardinals who are expected to release the first round of proposals for overhauling the Hole See bureaucracy.

From the moment he delivered the informal greeting "buona sera" to the masses at St Peter's Square it was clear something new was happening. Behind the Vatican facade though a lot more interesting things are taking place that will determine his legacy.