If fly-fishing is so simple, how come it seems like every guide in Colorado carries 5,000 flies to the river?

Good question. The reality is that most guides tend to use the same 15 or so flies all year anyway.

“If I could only fish with one dry fly for the rest of my life? I couldn’t live without a parachute Adams,” said Robert “The Bug Guy” Younghanz, a fly-fishing guide and instructor who stars in the top-selling DVD, “The Bug Guy: Entomology for the Fly Fisher.” “One nymph? A flashback pheasant tail. It covers so many different orders. Most important lake fly? Callibaetis.”

Anyone interested in taking up fly-fishing will want to develop at least a general knowledge of insects. At minimum, they should recognize the difference between a mayfly, a stonefly, a caddis fly and a midge. It helps to understand terrestrials (ants, beetles, grasshoppers and the like) and streamers (minnows, leeches and such). But most important is paying enough attention to the natural world to recognize when to try which fly.

In fishing jargon, it’s known as “matching the hatch,” imitating the size, shape and color of insects on the water with a lifelike replica. Some believe any realistic fly will do, however, as long as it’s presented properly to the fish.

“I firmly believe that presentation is more important than fly selection,” says Landon Mayer, author of “Colorado’s Best Fly Fishing.” “Instead of relying on the fly to catch the fish, I make sure every drift counts.”

Mayer has whittled his fly box down to 25 patterns in three sizes. By carrying fewer patterns that represent different food forms based on how they are presented, it allows the fisherman to focus more on technique.

The three key ingredients for a fly to make it into Mayer’s box are versatility (Barr’s Vis-A-Dun mimics many insects), durability (a tube midge will often last through a full day of fishing) and realism (if you’re not sure a fly is a good match, wet it to see what it really looks like).

Beyond the aforementioned Adams and pheasant tail, the age-old standards for most fly boxes include various sizes of bead-head Prince nymphs, black Woolly Buggers, elk-hair caddis, hare’s ears, Copper Johns and some larger form of black/brown/golden stonefly nymph, rubber legs optional. Maybe throw in a few Stimulators, a reliable grasshopper pattern, eggs, midges, San Juan worms and a classic attractor/indicator fly like a Royal Wulff, and you’ve got most of the bases covered.

Bear in mind during the modern era of fly-tying nomenclature that it’s increasingly difficult to classify a fly by name these days.

For example, here’s Mayer’s list: Rojo Midge, Jujubee Midge, Griffith’s Gnat, BWO Barr Emerger, JujuBaetis, Stalcup’s Baetis, Mathew’s BWO Sparkle Dun, Barr’s Graphic Caddis, Breadcrust, Landon’s Larva, Puterbaugh’s Foam Caddis, Mercer’s PoxyBack Little Yellow Stone, Barr’s Tungstone, Pat’s Rubber Legs, Crystal Stimulator, Rogue Stone, PMD Barr Emerger, Copper John, Mathew’s PMD Sparkle Dun, Parachute Adams, Foam Flying Ant, Flashtail Mini Egg, Slumpbuster, Lawson’s Conehead Sculpin and Meat Whistle.

And if you’re still wondering what a callibaetis is, just tie on a parachute Adams trailed by a pheasant tail, toss it into the lake and see what happens.