Runners and walkers make their way across the bridge Saturday during the 2015 Cooper River Bridge Run. Leroy Burnell/Staff

When I got around to looking at the registration form for the 38th Cooper River Bridge Run and Walk last January, one part of it made me gulp.

On Jan. 15, more than two months before Saturday’s race, the price went from $50 up to $55. By comparison, in 2014, the price went from $40 to $45 on February 15.

Race Director Julian Smith defended the price increase, saying it was the result of increased costs for buses and security — understandable considering the transportation problems that delayed the 2012 race and security concerns after the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013. Smith said participants get a lot for their entry fee, and that it was in line with similar 10K events.

He used Colorado’s Bolder Boulder 10K as an example. It has different prices and discounts depending on what kind of shirt you want and whether you’re young, old or in the military. For a short sleeve shirt, similar to the Bridge Run’s, the fee is $50 for adults and $35 for kids, seniors and military personnel two months before the race. Two weeks before the race, it goes up to $60 for adults and $45 for kids, seniors and military.

The largest 10K in the country, Atlanta’s Peachtree Road Race, is simple and inexpensive by comparison: $35 for Atlanta Track Club members and $38 for non-members. And New Orleans’ Crescent City 10K, which is usually held the same weekend as the Bridge Run, is $35 two months before the race.

Registrations way down

The increased fees may have played a role in the decrease of registered participants. Saturday’s preliminary registration count was 32,952, which is 5,520 less than in 2014 and the lowest since the event was moved to the Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge in 2006. The number of finishers — the preliminary count was 27,318 — marked the first time since 2008 that the Bridge Run didn’t break the 30,000 mark.

Early speculation by some Bridge Run staff and board members was that numbers were down because the race was held a week earlier to avoid being run on Easter weekend.

But in 2012, the last time the Bridge Run was held a week early because of Easter, it had record-breaking numbers. That year 43,635 registered and 36,756 finished the race, despite a delay of nearly an hour because of the crowd. Registration was capped at 38,500 for regularly priced entries as a result of that race. Other reasons cited for the lower numbers included a decrease in registration “email blasts” sent out this year, a colder than average winter, and hotels charging higher rates.

Is it too ‘pricey?’

The consensus of runners interviewed outside of the Charleston Running Club tent after the race was that an early registration fee of $55 was too expensive.

“It’s way too much for a 10K,” said Club President Paul MacDonald, who did not run the race because he needed to help staff the tent. “I make a good living, but I’m still careful about how I spend my money and I wouldn’t pay $55 for a 10K.”

After Thursday’s Yogapop event (which cost $25 in advance and $32 at the door), participant Keli Tolley said she was not running the Bridge Run this year because the fee was too much.

The event is even pricier for families with children who want to run. For a mother, father and two kids the total price tag was $220.

Other suggestions from runners: Give a discount to people who live in the greater Charleston area and charge a lower fee for walkers.

At Friday’s press lunch, Bridge Run founder Marcus Newberry and Charleston Mayor Joe Riley recalled the Bridge Run’s original intent in 1978 was to encourage local residents to adopt healthier lifestyles. With all the corporate sponsorships and attention to the bells and whistles, it would be a shame if the Bridge Run is pricing some people out of an event.

Maybe a more affordable event would be possible without entertainers, skydivers and an array of invitation-only parties.