The common wisdom is that retirement is pretty much a period of doom-and-gloom, thanks to worries over money, and that retirees are selling their homes to downsize and save a buck. But a new survey from Merrill Lynch and Age Wave has come up with some findings that don’t quite fit those stereotypes. Not in the least. 1. Freedom to choose



You might think older people are pretty much constrained by family obligations or health concerns to live in certain areas, but they’d beg to differ with you. In fact, the percentage of retirees saying that they are now free to live pretty much anywhere they want to increases steadily as they age. In fact, they’re twice as likely to say so as people who aren’t retired and who are still tied to the twin obligations of workplace location and family needs. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn





3. They love where they are Not only do 65 percent of retirees say that they’re living in the best home of their lives, they’re also happier than non-retirees with other things about where they live. Seventy-nine percent say their homes are comfortable; 75 percent say they’re in a safe community; 62 percent say that home is a good place to handle family visits and 48 percent are even happy with the weather. 4. Memories count more than money



Yes, many are so attached to their homes and the memories that they made there that they’d abandon the chance to fly south (or west, or some other compass point) to be able to live within the walls that sheltered them earlier in life. In fact, among those who are staying put, 54 percent said “I love my home” was the top reason.

5. The majority of retirees move at least once during retirement



5. The majority of retirees move at least once during retirement While they aren’t citing the weather as the reason to relocate, 64 percent of retirees say they’re likely to do so at least once; 37 percent have already done so and another 27 percent anticipate a change in homes. The top reason they give for the upheaval is the desire to be closer to family (29 percent). Other pressing concerns are cutting home expenses (26 percent), health changes (17 percent), a change in marital status (12 percent), empty nest (7 percent) and or simply wanting the cash from the sale of the home they’re leaving (7 percent).