Forum explores ways for Westport to escape impact of state's affordable housing law







































Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 1 of / 11 Caption Close Image 1 of 11 Planning and Zoning Director Laurence Bradley details provisions of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law to a forum hosted Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Planning and Zoning Director Laurence Bradley details provisions of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law to a forum hosted Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 2 of 11 Planning and Zoning Director Laurence Bradley details provisions of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law to a forum hosted Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Planning and Zoning Director Laurence Bradley details provisions of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law to a forum hosted Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 3 of 11 Planning and Zoning Director Laurence Bradley details provisions of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law to a forum hosted Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Planning and Zoning Director Laurence Bradley details provisions of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law to a forum hosted Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 4 of 11 Town Attorney Ira Bloom, left, and Matthew Mandell, right foreground, chairman of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee, listen to discussion of the state's affordable housing law Tuesday. less Town Attorney Ira Bloom, left, and Matthew Mandell, right foreground, chairman of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee, listen to discussion of the state's affordable housing law ... more Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 5 of 11 Town Attorney Ira Bloom, left, and Matthew Mandell, right foreground, chairman of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee, listen to discussion of the state's affordable housing law Tuesday. less Town Attorney Ira Bloom, left, and Matthew Mandell, right foreground, chairman of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee, listen to discussion of the state's affordable housing law ... more Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 6 of 11 Town Attorney Ira Bloom, left, and Matthew Mandell, right foreground, chairman of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee, listen to discussion of the state's affordable housing law Tuesday. less Town Attorney Ira Bloom, left, and Matthew Mandell, right foreground, chairman of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee, listen to discussion of the state's affordable housing law ... more Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 7 of 11 A forum on the potential impact of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law on Westport was hosted at the Town Hall auditorium Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. A forum on the potential impact of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law on Westport was hosted at the Town Hall auditorium Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 8 of 11 A forum on the potential impact of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law on Westport was hosted at the Town Hall auditorium Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. A forum on the potential impact of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law on Westport was hosted at the Town Hall auditorium Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 9 of 11 A forum on the potential impact of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law on Westport was hosted at the Town Hall auditorium Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. A forum on the potential impact of the state's 8-30g affordable housing law on Westport was hosted at the Town Hall auditorium Tuesday by the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee. Photo: Jarret Liotta Image 10 of 11 Developers want to put 200 units of affordable housing on the site of the Westport Inn, above, and local officials have been told the project and one other would be difficult for zoning officials to deny under current state law. less Developers want to put 200 units of affordable housing on the site of the Westport Inn, above, and local officials have been told the project and one other would be difficult for zoning officials to deny under ... more Photo: File Photo, ST Image 11 of 11 Forum explores ways for Westport to escape impact of state's affordable housing law 1 / 11 Back to Gallery

Plans for two large multiunit housing projects in Westport -- potentially filed under the state law that grants special consideration to "affordable" housing developments -- would be difficult to deny, a local forum on the law was told last week.

Prospects that the two housing proposals -- one on Hiawatha Lane with 186 units and the other at the Westport Inn property on Post Road East with about 200 units -- may seek approval under the state's 8-30g statute prompted members of the Representative Town Meeting's Planning and Zoning Committee to host the forum on the law's potential impact.

If the plans, which have yet to be formally filed with local zoning officials, propose that at least 30 percent of the units be rented and/or sold in compliance with the state's affordable housing criteria, the burden would be on the town to prove why the plans should be denied -- even if they exceed local regulations governing size and density.

Provisions of the 8-30g statute do not apply if 10 percent of a community's overall housing stock is restricted in conformance with the affordable criteria, but Westport's inventory now is only about 2.5 percent.

Some local officials, however, hope it might be possible to qualify for a moratorium that would exempt the town from the regulations of the state's Affordable Housing Act for four years.

About 100 people turned out for the RTM committee's forum to discuss the state law and its potential impact on Westport.

Local regs don't apply

"They do not have to abide by the local zoning regulations," Town Attorney Ira Bloom said of developers, who pitch a project under the law. "That's the whole idea. They can propose something that's more dense," provided the developer is "willing to commit to 30 percent of the units being affordable. In simplified fashion, that's what the law says."

Further, unlike a standard development application, in the event a project proposed under the 8-30g statue is denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the onus falls on the town to support its reasons for the denial. Bloom said these are generally limited to environmental impact and safety issues, which still could potentially be amended by developers to win approval for the application in the courts.

At the heart of local concerns is the idea that developers can take advantage of the law by building much larger and denser housing projects than local regulations would allow. In some cases, following legal battles, projects have even gone forward without the original requisite number of affordable units.

"That's really a problem with the law that I see," said P&Z Director Larry Bradley. "Developers don't always build the project they asked for " They don't even have to build affordable housing."

In Westport, Bradley told the meeting, "we have about 10,399 dwelling units, so in order to meet that 10 percent burden" to be exempt from its provisions, would require construction of nearly 1,000 new units. "We're closer to about 2 percent, two-and-a-half percent."

A moratorium

He explained, however, that credits toward that goal can be accumulated with smaller projects that could allow Westport to be granted a four-year moratorium that exempts it from 8-30g. He said, in view of some current projects underway, the town was potentially only 30 or 40 units away from being able to gather enough "points" to make it happen.

"In order for us to get to the moratorium we probably will have to build another 30 or 40 units," he said.

"Will we ever get to the 10 percent?" Bradley asked rhetorically. "Probably not likely because that'll require another 1,000 units."

Others concurred.

"It'll be smart for us to try to find a way to get to that moratorium," said state Rep. Jonathan Steinberg, D-136. "It may allow us enough time in the Legislature to at least protect towns like Westport from the worst of it. We're very limited with what we can do with the statute as it exists today."

"There are better ways to encourage affordable housing than this statute," he said, noting that 8-30g is a punitive law rather than an incentive.

He and other state lawmakers said they plan to try to get the law changed, if not repealed.

State Rep. Gail Lavielle, R-143, pointed out that the motive behind the law was about bringing the amenities of economic equality to more children and families, including better schools. She said cities like Norwalk -- and their lawmakers -- have no motivation to see the law changed, despite the sentiments of those living in suburban communities.

State Sen. Tony Hwang, R-28, said that as the "ranking leader on the housing committee," he believes a revision of the law can be facilitated.

He said that Westport and Fairfield are "way ahead of 8-30g," though most of each town's existing affordable housing isn't counted under the statute. "They don't count anything built before 1990 as part of that 10 percent " If you look at the housing stock that was built before 1990, we would qualify," he said.

"This is not an example of a community that's trying to keep out affordable housing," he said, noting however that the two large projects on the drawing boards in Westport "are inconsistent with the character of this town."

Hwang said, "8-30g is being used as a statute to pursue economic gains."