The front of one of Proudly Yours' 12 romantic greeting cards created specifically for gay men. ( Proudly Yours / Courtesy photo )

None of the greeting cards was right.

Dan McLellan was gearing up to celebrate his anniversary with his boyfriend, Michael Jones, but the romantic cards on the shelves were either too cutesy, too suggestive or, well, too straight.

Instead, McLellan, of Boulder, decided to make his own greeting card using a black-and-white stock image of two men sitting on a couch, their hands overlapping. Ever the fan of famous quotes, McLellan printed one on the inside:

"Love is what makes two people sit in the middle of a bench when there is plenty of room at both ends." — Anonymous

Jones loved it, McLellan says. Previous cards had felt so generic, but this one felt personal.

"I showed a couple of people, and they said, 'You ought to do this. There's nothing like this around,' " McLellan says. "There was so much for the straight community, and I wasn't finding that for the gay community."

Within a year, his personal gesture had turned into a business, Proudly Yours, which specializes in romantic greeting cards for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community.

The first run in 2012 featured six different cards that McLellan created with the consultation of his former wife, an experienced designer. His trademark style: sophisticated, black-and-white photography and a general, inspirational quote on the inside.

"I didn't make my cards for a specific occasion," he says. "Some people celebrate things differently. Some gay couples do not like the word husband or wife. Some don't choose to get married but choose to make a commitment to each other. ... Each card can be used to celebrate any milestone in a couple's life, or celebrate a couple."

Dan McLellan, left, started Proudly Yours greeting cards after making one for his now-husband, Michael Jones, right. (Proudly Yours / Courtesy photo)

McLellan began selling the cards on Zazzle.com, and the steady demand led him to partner with a Denver-based, gay-owned printing company, Integrity Print Group. He began working with nephew, Tom McLellan, and Tom's Denver-based photography company, Rhythmic Visions, for original images.

Dan McLellan's most recent run featured 24 different cards: 12 for women and 12 for men. He opened an Amazon.com store, and the cards are now sold in 15 different card and bookstores across the country. None in Colorado yet.

"People were a little nervous about having LBGT cards, whether they thought they wouldn't sell or thought people might have a negative reaction," Dan McLellan says, explaining why he believes no local stores carry them. He says he plans to try to get picked up locally again, in light of the growing movement for marriage equality.

Online orders tend to take three to five days for delivery (so there are still a few days to order online for Valentine's Day).

Since the original Proudly Yours card, Jones and Dan McLellan were married in New York.

Same-sex greeting cards are now easier to find, too. Hallmark makes a variety, as well as baby book pages, and you can find them in Target stores nationwide. A Google search will bring up a long list of gay greeting card companies.

"Gay couples have always been looking for cards, but now allies are being invited to gay weddings. As more people come out ... and have more visibility, more people are starting to celebrate our union more readily," McLellan says.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay