The 2016 presidential election has apparently begun in earnest and, even though he’s not even a full-fledged candidate for the Republican nomination, abortion advocates are already trashing potential candidate Scott Walker, the Wisconsin governor.

Walker has a lengthy pro-life record, signing multiple pro-life bills that have resulted in historic declines in the number of abortions in Wisconsin. Although Walker has stood up for protecting unborn children, he recently has touted the pro-woman aspect of his abortion record — releasing an ad late last year touting how he signed a bill to ensure women are able to see an ultrasound of their abortion beforehand and are given information about abortion alternatives.

Not content to let Walker steal any of their thunder — NARAL is renewing its bogus “war on women” attacks by claiming Walker is distorting his pro-life record by emphasizing how he also supports women. NARAL has unleashed a new ad essentially calling Walker a liar.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

The NARAL ad announcement comes one day after Walker issued a letter re-stating his pro-life views and affirming his commitment to a ban on abortions after 20-weeks.

NARAL is so concerned Walker could become the nominee and win the 2016 election over Hillary Clinton that it’s taken out a full-page ad in the Des Moines Register, home of the first-in-the-nation Republican caucus, attacking Walker. Here’s more form the left-wing Madison newspaper:

An abortion rights group is telling Iowans that Gov. Scott Walker “will never be honest with you” about his record on abortion, according to a full-page advertisement in Thursday’s Des Moines Register. In its ad, NARAL Pro-Choice America said Walker has pushed to restrict access to contraception and legal abortions — a record he downplayed in 2014 during his re-election campaign against Madison School Board member Mary Burke.

Walker, a 2016 presidential hopeful who by many accounts won the Iowa Freedom Summit in January, will return to Iowa on Saturday to speak at the 2015 Iowa Ag Summit in Des Moines. He will be joined by other Republicans seeking the GOP presidential nomination, including New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush. The advertisement comes days after Walker released an open letter saying he would sign a Wisconsin bill that banned abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy. No such bill has been introduced yet, but an Assembly Republican told the State Journal on Tuesday that one is in the works. The ad says Walker misled voters on his record by saying in the fall that legislation he signed on abortion leaves the final decision to women and their doctors, even though he had also previously sponsoring an abortion ban bill and legislation what would allow doctors to refuse to provide contraception.

Pro-life groups were delighted by Walker’s letter supporting the ban on abortions after 20 weeks.

“Wisconsin Right to Life is very happy to hear that Governor Walker intends to sign a bill that would protect unborn children who are capable of feeling pain,” stated Heather Weininger, Executive Director of Wisconsin Right to Life. “In light of this excellent news, we urge the Wisconsin State Legislature to pass a bill to protect pain-capable unborn children as soon as possible.”

In 2013, Gov. Walker signed an ultrasound bill (Senate Bill 206, also known as Sonya’s Law) that ensures that women seeking abortions are given the opportunity to see their unborn children through ultrasound. The legislation also requires abortionists to have admitting privileges within thirty miles of their facility. This is the kind of pro-woman, pro-life bill that not only has proven to save the lives of unborn babies, but it has closed down abortion clinics that can’t comply with basic health and safety requirements. Sure enough, abortion centers in Wisconsin closed down after Walker signed the bill into law.

In an ad during his re-election campaign, Walker put forward a clear cut pro-life message showing compassion for women and unborn children: “I’m pro-life. But there’s no doubt in my mind the decision of whether or not to end a pregnancy is an agonizing one. That’s why I support legislation to increase safety and to provide more information for a woman considering her options.”

Walker has been a tireless advocate for women and unborn children, and when the bill passed, Wisconsin Right to Life applauded his efforts to protect citizens in their state.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

The former legislative director of Wisconsin Right to Life, Susan Armacost, said “We thank Governor Walker for signing this important piece of legislation into law. Sonya’s Law will empower women to make truly informed decisions regarding how they will proceed with their pregnancies and will protect the lives of women who experience complications after their abortions.”

Since the ultrasound bill helps protect women and provides them with more information, you would think groups like Planned Parenthood and Emily’s List would support it. But instead, they oppose it and say it causes undue burden for women seeking abortions. This is because abortion businesses lose money when women change their mind about abortion. And since 78% of women who see an ultrasound of their unborn baby refuse abortion, its really bad for business.

Since Governor Walker took office in January 2011, the pro-life movement in Wisconsin has made monumental gains. Walker signed into law a state budget that included a provision to prohibit the UW Hospital Authority from being involved in performing abortions and from using taxpayer dollars to pay medical students to learn how to perform abortions. Walker steered Wisconsin Well Woman funds to local counties instead of Planned Parenthood.

Governor Walker also signed bills that allow Wisconsin to opt out of abortion funding under Obamacare, to protect pregnant women from coerced abortions and to prohibit RU486 chemical web cam abortions.

Ultimately, Walker and his record will appeal to pro-life Republicans looking for a replacement for Obama, who has been called the Abortion President.

As Armacost said: “Governor Walker’s deep belief in the sanctity of all human life is evident in the courageous actions he has taken to build a culture of life in Wisconsin. His concern for the most vulnerable members of the human family is reflected in the common sense and compassionate laws he has signed into law. Those initiatives will greatly benefit unborn children, women who are considering abortion and taxpayers of our state.”

Pro-life voters can also be assured that Governor Walker is an effective pro-life governor — after all, abortion activists wished he were dead. But he and his prospects for 2016 are very much alive.

Wisconsin Right to Life provided LifeNews with a lengthy dossier on Walker’s pro-life record, including votes while he was a member of the state legislature:

Abortion Funding: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted against taxpayer funding of abortions for public employees. As Governor, Walker signed into law a state budget provision to prohibit the UW Hospital Authority from being involved in performing abortions and from using taxpayer dollars to pay medical students to learn to perform abortions. Also as Governor, Walker signed legislation allowing Wisconsin to opt-out of taxpayer-funded abortion coverage under ObamaCare.

Funding Abortion Providers: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted to prohibit taxpayer dollars from going to organizations that provide or promote abortions. As Governor, Walker signed into law a state budget provision to prohibit Title V taxpayer dollars from going to organizations that perform abortions. Also as Governor, Walker steered funds from the Wisconsin Well Woman program to local counties instead of Planned Parenthood.

Protecting Unborn Children: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted to recognize an unborn child as a separate victim of a criminal act against the pregnant mother, to prohibit partial-birth abortions, and to protect unborn children at risk due to drug or alcohol use by the mother.

Protecting Families: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted to strengthen Wisconsin’s law requiring parental consent before a minor’s abortion. As Governor, Walker signed legislation returning sex education curriculum to local control and allowing abstinence-only programs.

Protecting Women: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted for the Woman’s Right to Know Act which requires that women be given full information prior to an abortion and establishes a 24-hour waiting period. As Governor, Walker signed legislation to protect women from coerced abortions; to prohibit unsafe RU 486 chemical web cam abortions designed to expand abortions into local communities; to require that a woman view an ultrasound of her unborn child 24 hours before an abortion can take place; and to require abortionists to have admitting privileges at a hospital within 30 miles of the abortion clinic.

Alternatives to Abortion: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted for tax exemptions related to adoption expenses; to improve adoption laws; to expand funding for adoption assistance for children at risk of developing disabilities; and for a provision to allow a woman and her unborn child to be considered as a family eligible for BadgerCare.

Conscience Protections: As an Assembly Representative, Walker authored legislation to strengthen conscience protections for medical professionals and institutions.

Other: As an Assembly Representative, Walker voted in favor of legislation to prohibit lawsuits based on the “wrongful” life of an unborn child and to prohibit the sale of body parts of aborted babies.