Dear Chief Larkin,

In October 2011, I wrote a farewell letter to the city's last police chief. I figured I wouldn't need to be pondering doing such a thing any time soon again once you got the job.

You seemed unbelievably engaged in the job, invested in the community and passionate about being part of all the leaders trying to make Guelph an even better place. I know that was no act. No one could have feigned the level of sustained, omniscient, energetic and participatory leadership you have provided since becoming Guelph's top cop.

I hope the Waterloo gig proves an even better one or the right next step for where you want to end up professionally.

You will be missed – regardless of whom the Guelph police board lands as your replacement.

You were the Mercury's male newsmaker of the year last year. You respected the role of our journalists and of the newspaper. At times, you were less open about newsworthy matters than we wanted you to be. For example, the final police report arising from the investigation into Const. Jennifer Kovach's death was never released to us. You were also assiduously evasive regarding a series of recent inquiries and interview requests about whether you had applied or interviewed for the Waterloo Region police chief job. We only got you talking about the subject once on an ambush interview related to a different subject.

But you also did such things as clear the way for the release of a copy of a video of the infamous Olympic Torch Relay protest debacle that saw two people criminally charged and the torch spill to Macdonell Street. You also consented to extended interviews following some difficult times in local policing.

You did so in the wake of Const. Kovach's death and after the agreement was reached to end Const. Chris Panylo's Police Service Act hearing by way of accepting his resignation – effective more than half a year later.

Additionally, you met more than once with our editorial board for informal and on-the-record discussions.

I know some of our editorial positions expressed things that weren't always pleasing to you. To your credit, you never cut us off journalistically from you after any editorial that had to sting. Some of these editorials you even retweeted on your incredibly prolific twitter account. Some of them.

Your rise on Twitter was interesting to behold. I never thought 140 characters would be enough for someone so given to long-form answers with journalists and others. Yet, you tweeted up a storm as chief. Sometimes, I wondered how you managed to fit in being @Chief_BLarkin and Chief Bryan Larkin, too.

Your gift for gab off-line gave me an expression I have often repeated. I have quoted you when I do. It related to your wise take you once shared with me about how some organizations – you applied it to police ones – are perpetually unhappy with the current state and generally resistant to change. That's brilliant and so true.

I'll recall that. I'll also remember how you jumped in with restaurant staff and my family to belt out Happy Birthday to my daughter one evening. She was then 10. You were out for a bite to eat during a trying shift – about 19 hours after Const. Kovach's death. I was likely among the people you would have least wanted to have seen that day or have been seated near to at that moment.

But you acknowledged me, the members of our little party, accepted my condolences in a brief aside and, many minutes later, joined the happy birthday chorus.

That was remarkable. I would have suspected it was a calculated act. But I've observed you do similar things so many times and been told of enough similar Larkin moments citizens have had, that I'm convinced otherwise.

It has been interesting and productive during your time as chief of police here. Professionally and personally I wish you the best when you're in Waterloo Region.