The class of 2019 won't have to pass the PARCC exams to graduate, state officials said.

High school freshman won't have to pass PARCC to graduate, state officials said. (Photo: Associated Press)

This year's high school freshmen won't have to pass the state's new standardized exams to graduate and some juniors could be exempt from the English portion of the test, the Department of Education said.

PARCC or the Partnership for the Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers debuted last year and tests students in math and English based on the Common Core education standards.

In a memo sent Wednesday to district superintendents, State Education Commissioner David Hespe said the class of 2019 could graduate by passing the PARCC, a substitute assessment like the SAT or ACT, or going through an appeals process. Those same requirements already apply to students graduating in 2016, 2017 and 2018.

Hespe said extending the graduation requirements to the class of 2019 would ensure "adequate time for transition to the new assessments."

In another memo to districts, Hespe said high school juniors can be exempt from the English PARCC test if they take Advanced Placement or International Baccalaureate English exams in 11th-grade.

MaryJane Garibay, superintendent of Colts Neck schools, a pre-k through eighth-grade district, said eliminating the need for some juniors to take an additional exam was a positive.

"Anything that reduces the amount of time that kids are tested in a standardized environment is a good thing," she said. "The focus should be on learning and not on testing."

Linos Frantzeskakis, a parent at Freehold High School, said his daughter — a junior taking AP English — will definitely take advantage of the exemption because she does not test well on computers.

He added the state should have introduced PARCC exams on a trial basis, ironing out the kinks before linking any graduation requirements to them.

"For me, it’s a step backward. I agree with common standards but the delivery and platform and the way it was introduced was done very awkwardly," he said. "It’s a little bit too much trial and error and you don’t expect that in education."

Parents and students represented by the Education Law Center are suing the DOE for failing to follow the law when it changed high school graduation requirements last fall. The complaint, filed earlier this month, claims the state changed diploma requirements without proper notice to students. The suit is asking the state to formally propose and adopt the new graduation rules and allow the public to comment on them.

Karen Yi: 732-643-4277; kyi@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EYnmh4