Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Arts program allows Boulder County war veterans to share their stories

A photo by veteran and CU student Adam Nilson, whose work will be featured in The Dairy Center's Veterans Speak exhibit. (Adam Nilson / Courtesy photo) If you go What: Veterans Speak, a two-week recognition of Veterans Day to engage veterans and the public in art, presentations, movies, discussions, performances and more. When: Various events through Nov. 21. See website for specific times of events. Keynote speaker Janine Davidson appears at 2 p.m. today. Where: The Dairy Center for the Arts, 2590 Walnut St., Boulder Tickets: Prices vary by event. Info: thedairy.org or 303-440-7826 Brad Gallup tells haunting stories about soldiers in combat who felt the exact moment when their souls left their bodies. War can wound the soul, says the Boulder man. "You've been wounded at this deep, deep part," Gallup says. "Nobody wants to talk about it, or even knows how to talk about it." But this Veterans Day, Boulder is talking. Gallup, a veteran with 21 years of service who served in Operation Desert Storm, is part of an awareness and fundraising effort for a new documentary, "Go In Peace." And for the first time, several local veterans organizations have banded together with The Dairy Center for the Arts to honor veterans in the biggest, collaborative Veterans Day celebration in Boulder County history. The event had a soft opening Friday and runs through Nov. 21. The keynote speaker, Janine Davidson, offers a free presentation at 2 p.m. today in The Dairy's Performance Space. Davidson, who attended the University of Colorado in Boulder, is a senior fellow for the Defense Policy at the Council of Foreign Relations, and she will talk about defense strategy and policy, national security and civil-military relations. Stephanie Rudy, committee chair of Veterans Speak, came up with the idea for a special Veterans Day event after spending time at an Army war college, where she learned about the military. A sculpture by Fredric Arnold, 92, of Boulder, who was a fighter pilot in World War II. This figure will be one of 12 in a New Orleans-based memorial to the 88,000 airmen lost in the war. Arnold is the last surviving member of his P-38 fighter group, and he also published a novel, "Doorknob Five Two," about his wartime experiences. (Jafe Parsons / Courtesy photo) "I realized nowhere in Boulder do we ever do anything on a collaborative basis to honor and celebrate veterans," Rudy says. "There's no Veterans Day or Memorial Day parade ... There are little things, but there's no collaborative thing." There is now. The Dairy Center, in conjunction with the Broomfield Veterans Memorial Museum, the University of Colorado Boulder Office of Veteran Services and CU's Student Veterans Association, has set aside two full weeks to honor veterans. Veterans Speak will span all forms of expression: multiple art exhibits, movies, dance, spoken word, theater, music, presentations, discussion panels, informal storytelling conversations and a book club. "I can't explain the number of people I've met in this town who have stories to tell but have never had an opportunity to tell them," Rudy says. Such as Richard Jesser, who has been a professor of behavioral science at CU for 64 years. What many people don't know is Jesser also served in the Battle of Iwo Jima, event organizers say. He has never previously shared his story publicly. Fredric Arnold, 91, was known as a local actor who appeared in TV shows such as "Hill Street Blues" and "Dynasty" and the movie "The Naked Gun," to name a few. But he also is the last surviving member of his original P-38 fighter group. "He agreed when he got out of the military, he would live life to the fullest, in honor of his comrades," says Mary Horrocks, curator at The Dairy Center. "He is now an accomplished visual artist. He made an amazing life-sized bronze sculpture representing one of the men from his unit." The sculpture will be on display at The Dairy for Veterans Speak, then will be relocated to New Orleans as part of a permanent collection at The National WWII Museum. Rudy says she wants the community to hear the veterans' stories before they are lost; more than 1,000 World War II vets die every day, according to Dairy Center research. By the numbers • 22 veterans commit suicide daily, according to the U.S Department of Veterans Affairs • 700-plus veterans on the University of Colorado-Boulder campus, according to the CU Office of Veteran Services • 1,000-plus World War II veterans die every day, according to The Dairy Center for the Arts She is moved to tears when she thinks about it. "These are people who in some cases were drafted but in a lot of cases gave up their family and personal life and work life to go and support this country," she says. "There are many of us back here who don't understand what that means." Bill Obermeier, executive director of The Dairy, says he believes society needs to do a better job re-integrating, accepting and appreciating veterans. What can you do? If you think a veteran you know might have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), the film "Go In Peace" suggests taking these seven steps: • Recognize the veteran. The soldier in the person is forever changed by military experience. • Understand the symptoms of PTSD, which author Ed Tick has renamed "Post Terror Soul Distress." • Create a safe physical and emotional space. Remove triggers, create an environment in which the veteran feels able to open up. • Prepare yourself and find the courage to ask the difficult questions. • Listen and validate. Without judgment, avoiding belittling or dismissing what the veteran shares. • Create opportunities for ritual for acknowledgment of grief and loss, purification and forgiveness. • Create opportunities for atonement, or action after forgiveness, to help make the world feel "whole" for the vet again. "I'm hopeful this starts to set some sort of a precedent elsewhere in the country that we have to pay more attention to the veterans. We've got to do a better job for them," Obermeier says. 'Go In Peace' When Gallup returned from Operation Desert Storm, he says, he thought he was fine. Until about six months later. "I found myself upstairs in my bedroom with my wife and 3-year-old daughter, with a shotgun to my throat, and I didn't realize how I got there," he says. "I didn't realize how much pain and depression was going on." That was his turning point. He sought therapy and began working as a grief facilitator for other survivors. Helping others helped him. So did artistic expression, he says. Gallup is working on a metal sculpture project now. He says he realized, "If I'm going through this kind of suffering, other vets are going through it, too." In fact, about 8,000 veterans kill themselves every year, often due to post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Gallup believes that number is low, and he says it's more than PTSD; it's a "post-terror soul distress." He borrows that term from author Ed Tick, who is featured in a local documentary, "Go In Peace," by director Karen van Vuuren. "When you're at war and people are trying to kill you and you're trying to kill other people, you have to armor up physically and mentally to go through that," he says. "And the problem is, once you go through that, you don't realize how much armor you've got on, and you don't know how to take it off. You become so disconnected from everything." You don't feel your own pain, he says, and there is no ritual or reinitiation to help you process your experience and re-integrate into society. "The reality is, we're a culture that tells people we've trained as warriors to come back and become a civilian again," Gallup says. "But you never become a civilian again. You've been transformed." Injured on a spiritual level, he says. Van Vuuren's veteran father, Jack, was the inspiration for "Go In Peace." He had served in the military in Holland starting at age 14. She says it wasn't until he was dying that the horrors he had experienced bubbled to the surface. On the web • "Go In Peace" crowdfunding project: igg.me/at/GIPptsd • "Go In Peace" film: goinpeacefilm.org, facebook.com/goinpeacevets He and his best friend had strangled a German soldier before they escaped to join the Allied Forces. His "confession" awoke in her the realization of how much grief he had been carrying — and the desire to create a safe space for other veterans to heal. Her documentary offers a holistic process to help veterans heal their "soul wounds," she says. It includes "purification rituals," like you can find in other cultures after battle, to help the soldiers forgive themselves and atone for their actions by doing something positive to improve the world. Van Vuuren hopes to be able to provide the film for free to anyone online and via DVD. She is running a campaign now to fund that. Looking back, van Vuuren sees her father's actions differently. He was nervous and jumpy. He couldn't handle the sound of crying children. She believes those were symptoms of his pain that she did not recognize, so she was unable to offer him the compassion that might have helped him heal. The first step is to listen. But many people don't want to hear it, van Vuuren says. "We are scared of feeling their pain," she says. Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/Aimeemay.