Meryem Ali, 28, of Houston, Texas, is suing Facebook for $123 million for failing to remove her likeness in “revenge porn” photos posted to their site. As she tells Cosmopolitan.com, a man she had hung out with three times created a fake profile with photos of Ali’s head photoshopped onto pornographic images. Ali’s original contact with Facebook with pretty much ignored (as well as contact made by family and friends). Four-and-a-half months later, Facebook finally took down the offending content only after they were contacted by police. Ali is now suing the site for 10 cents for every one of Facebook’s 1.23 billion users. [Cosmopolitan.com]

Following the Hobby Lobby decision this summer, Obama administration has a new policy to ensure women employed by for-profit employers and religiously-affiliated nonprofits can still get their contraception covered by health insurance, even if their employers personally object to birth control. [Washington Post]

Also, a timeline of the contraception controversy in the Affordable Care Act can be found here. [Wall Street Journal]

The Navy has discharged Jessica Sims, an African-American woman sailor, for refusing to obey the order of cutting off her natural hair. The Navy claims her hair would be difficult to wear under a gas mask; Sims said she has been wearing her hair the same way for years without a problem. [Think Progress]

The San Francisco Police Academy graduated its first-ever transgender cop, Mikayla Connell, from the police force. [Mic]

Men who are punished in sexual misconduct cases, such as sexual assault and rape accusations, at their colleges are fighting back. [Washington Post]

The ACLU and several immigration groups are suing the Obama administration for its treatment of Latin American women and children being held at detention centers in New Mexico. [ColorLines]

Jon Stewart and Stephen Colbert are both getting dinged for mostly inviting white men as guests on their shows. [Reuters]

Meet two successful Brazilian businesswomen who saw an opening for affordable hair salons geared towards women of color. [Ozy]

See a story that belongs in Today’s Lady News? Send it to me at Jessica@TheFrisky.com or follow me on Twitter.

[Image of surprised woman using a computer via Shutterstock]