Under the Radar Blog Archives Select Date… April, 2016 March, 2016 February, 2016 January, 2016 December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015

Judge interprets Obamacare with pizza order

Could pizza be the key to understanding Congress's intent in a disputed section of the Obamacare law?

One of the judges who ruled on the issue Tuesday seemed to think so, arguing that deciphering his pizza order underscored the wisdom of his interpretation of President Barack Obama's signature health reform law.

"If I ask for pizza from Pizza Hut for lunch but clarify that I would be fine with a pizza from Domino's, and I then specify that I want ham and pepperoni on my pizza from Pizza Hut, my friend who returns from Domino's with a ham and pepperoni pizza has still complied with a literal construction of my lunch order," Senior 4th Circuit Judge Andre Davis wrote in a concurring opinion.

Davis said the pizza analogy was directly applicable to the dispute over whether Congress's reference in the law to subsidies for health exchanges established by a state could fairly be interpreted to cover federally-run exchanges set up for states which declined to create their own exchange.

"That is this case: Congress specified that Exchanges should be established and run by the states, but the contingency provision permits federal officials to act in place of the state when it fails to establish an Exchange. The premium tax credit calculation subprovision later specifies certain conditions regarding state-run Exchanges, but that does not mean that a literal reading of that provision somehow precludes its applicability to substitute federally-run Exchanges or erases the contingency provision out of the statute," Davis wrote.

Two of Davis's 4th Circuit colleagues agreed that the Obama Administration's interpretation of the law was a better one, though they said it was only "slightly" so and they reached their conclusion without invoking pizza or any other food product. All three 4th Circuit judges on the case also said the courts were obliged to defer to reasonable agency interpretations of such laws.

In a ruling issued just a couple of hours earlier on Tuesday, a panel of the D.C. Circuit reached the opposite result on a 2-1 vote, holding that the administration's interpretation was contrary to Congress's language in the law. The White House quickly said it would ask the full bench of the D.C. Circuit to re-hear the challenge.

Davis was appointed to the 4th Circuit by Obama and was earlier appointed to the federal district court in Maryland by President Bill Clinton.

Josh Gerstein is a senior reporter for POLITICO.