Union workers cheer as New York Governor Andrew Cuomo speaks to at a rally in Union Square on May 7, 2015 in New York City. Cuomo announced that he would create a so-called Wage Board, a move that could allow him to raise the minimum wage without the approval of state lawmakers. The issues surrounding minimum wage workers has become a contentious campaign issue recently with thousands of workers staging protests at fast food restaurants and other retail outlets in recent months. (Photo: Spencer Platt, Getty Images)

Keener Barnhorst, 24, juggles three part-time jobs — as a social media tracker, bow tie salesman and box-office clerk for the San Diego Padres. He would prefer one full-time position.

"I just want stability," says Barnhorst, adding that his low-pay jobs keep him from moving out of his parents' house more than a year after he graduated from San Diego State University.

Although the labor market is inching closer to full health by many measures, the ranks of part-time workers who prefer full-time jobs remain swollen. Their total — 6.7 million — has dropped just 8.4% the past year and is well above the prerecession level of about 4.4 million, Labor Department figures show.

By contrast, the number of discouraged workers who have stopped looking for jobs — another gauge of labor-market pain — has fallen 20% the past year. And the nation's unemployment rate is 5.5%, close to the 5% to 5.2% that the Federal Reserve considers normal.

Fed Chair Janet Yellen has cited the large number of so-called involuntary part-time workers as a reason to keep interest rates near zero for longer to spur more economic growth and full-time job creation. But a report last week by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco concludes that a third of the rise in involuntary part-time workers since 2006 is due to long-term changes in the labor market that may be less responsive to low interest rates.

In May, 4.2% of the labor force was made up of involuntary part-timers, the San Francisco Fed says. In May 1996 and late 2004, when unemployment was at the current level of 5.5%, the share of involuntary part-timers was just 3.2%.

One reason for the prevalence of reluctant part-timers is that workers under 25, who often want to part time work, have comprised a progressively smaller share of the labor force. That forces employers to draw part-timers from the pool of older Americans who want full-time jobs, the study says.

Another factor is that hotels and restaurants, which employ many part-time workers, make up a bigger share of the labor market than they did before the recession and have been slow to replace part-timers with full timers, according to the San Francisco Fed and Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS).

Employer preferences also have changed. Many businesses likely have limited their hiring of full-time workers to avoid health coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act, says RBS Chief Economist Michelle Girard.

And employers in sectors such as retail, warehousing and call centers are increasingly using software to slot in part-timers to handle peak customer demand, says Susan Lambert, a labor economist at the University of Chicago.

"That trend is not going to reverse just because the economy is getting better," she says.

Other firms are bringing on part-time workers for projects that may not require 40 hours a week. Wilson Holding Co., of Key Biscayne, Fla, which coordinates employee training and conferences, has 11 full-time employees and seven part-timers. CEO Richard Wilson says the part-timers, perform tasks such as book editing and graphic design. If he replaced them with full-time workers, each would have to do handle multiple roles.

"I'm getting somebody who is specialized," he says. Plus, he says, he saves on health care costs. Most part-time workers don't get benefits such as health insuranceor paid vacation.

Lambert, though, says ever-shifting part-time schedules can make it hard for workers to meet household expenses and often generate higher employee turnover.

Lyndsay Lujano, 31, of Kerman, Calif., has worked at a discount grocery chain for 12 years but still averages about 30 hours a week. She and her husband, who works part time for another grocery store, live with her parents to cut costs.

"I can't save and go on vacation and just go out and buy things," she says.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Sixgge