Experience on and off the battlefield, as well as a desire to see the constitution upheld by the federal government, has led a Rogers county man to pursue a seat in the U.S. Congress.

Jarrin Jackson, 30, of Claremore, has formally announced his intention to seek the U.S. District 2 congressional seat, currently held by Rep. Markwayne Mullin (R-Oklahoma).

Jackson, a former U.S. Army Ranger, established his candidacy in late November 2015. He will be one of the guest speakers during this month's meeting of the Delaware County Republicans.

That meeting is set for 6 p.m., Monday, Jan. 12, at Trinity Baptist Church, 206 Elk Street, Grove.

"America is getting sicker, we are getting less safe because our leaders don't defend the constitution, it's that simple," Jackson said, adding that his deciding point, to seek political office, came during his last tour in Afghanistan.

"It was August 2014, and I saw ISIS flags outside the gate [of where he was stationed]," Jackson said. "We weren't allowed to patrol or investigate the flags. We weren't supposed to get involved in a fight.

"ISIS was in Afghanistan, but I believe the military was under orders not to tell."

Jackson said he began to question the leadership, those in charge of the decisions impacting the military.

"Being overseas, on the front lines, being shot at wasn't enough in my opinion," Jackson said, of his decision to step away from his military career and instead seek out a career in public service.

Jackson describes himself as a Constitutional Republican, as well as a "Christian, husband, father and son."

"There are all sorts of nouns for me," Jackson said. "I'm someone who wants to help and has a heart for service."

Jackson said his views most emulate those of U.S. Congressman Jim Bridenstine (R-Oklahoma). He believes his experience, while serving in the military, will be effective in congress.

More About Jackson

Jackson and his wife, Katie, live in Claremore. Katie Jackson works as a pediatrician in the pediatrics emergency room at St. Francis Hospital in Tulsa.

The couple, who met while attending church in Nashville, Tennessee, have two children, Lloyd, 4, a prekindergartener, and Dale, who turned 1 on Tuesday, Jan. 5. The family attends Memorial Road Church of Christ in Tulsa.