WASHINGTON — The U.S. Senate race in Arkansas has been among the most expensive and hotly contested in the nation with the two major party candidates and their supporters spending more than $42.6 million on the campaign while two minor party candidates have been left largely on the sidelines.

U.S. Sen. Mark Pryor, 51, a Democrat from Little Rock, is seeking a third term. He is being challenged by freshman Rep. Tom Cotton, 37, a Republican from Dardanelle, as well as Nathan LaFrance, 36, a Libertarian from Bella Vista, and Mark Swaney, 61, a Green Party nominee from Huntsville. Senators are elected for six-year term and are paid $174,000 annually.

The U.S. Senate is controlled by Democrats, who hold a 55-45 advantage. Republicans are hoping a victory in Arkansas will help them regain the majority. The state has shifted toward the GOP in recent state and federal elections, and polls have shown strong dissatisfaction with President Barack Obama.

Cotton has largely tried to make the mid-term contest a referendum on Obama, repeating that Pryor has been a rubber stamp for the president. Pryor has countered that he puts Arkansas first while Cotton has marched in lockstep with outside groups banked by conservative billionaires.

Here is a brief summary of the Arkansas candidates as well as their stands on the Farm Bill, the Affordable Care Act, and military action in Syria and Iraq that was compiled from their responses in recent debates. Early voting for the Nov. 4 election begins Monday.

Mark Pryor

A native of Fayetteville, Pryor graduated from the University of Arkansas in 1985 and earned a law degree three years later. His father, David Pryor, represented the state as governor and U.S. senator for more than two decades.

Pryor began his political career in the Arkansas State House in 1990 and later served as state Attorney General before being elected to the U.S. Senate in 2003. He is chairman of the Senate Appropriations agriculture subcommittee. He is also a member of the Commerce, Science and Transportation and Homeland and Governmental Affairs committees.

He and his wife, Jill, divorced in 2012 after a 20-year marriage. They have two children, Adams and Porter.

The Farm Bill is the most important piece of legislation affecting Arkansas, where 25 percent of the economy is dependent on agriculture. Separating farm and nutrition policies is wrong because it jeopardizes both programs as well as other programs for rural America, including broadband.

Before the Affordable Care Act passed, Arkansans were routinely denied health insurance if they had a pre-existing condition. They were one medical emergency away from bankruptcy and, back then, insurance companies had all the power. We needed to put patients back in charge. The law has also led to a private option in Arkansas that is providing insurance to 200,000 lower-income residents.

I support air strikes in order to damage the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq. There are three criteria that must be met to support military action, which I believe apply. There must be a clear national security threat. There must be a clear mission with definable and attainable goals. And, there must be a coalition with regional partners to help bear the burden and risk. ISIS is a threat, and we must meet threats like this head on. We have to destroy their capability to harm America.

Tom Cotton

Cotton grew up on a farm in Yell County where his family raised a small herd of cattle. His mother was a public school principal and his father worked for the state department of health.

Cotton is a graduate of Harvard University in 1999 and Harvard Law School in 2002. After earning his law degree, Cotton served as a judicial clerk and in private practice before enlisting in the U.S. Army. He served in Iraq in 2006 and Afghanistan in 2008. Cotton is serving his first term in the House and is on the Financial Services and Foreign Affairs committees.

He married Anna Peckham, an attorney from Virginia, in March and the couple are expecting their first child.

We need a real Farm Bill that focuses on farmers and a separate food stamp bill without the waste and abuse and institutionalized fraud that games the system so that more people can be enrolled. The Farm Bill that passed was a bad deal for Arkansas farmers. Arkansas farmers get about one-half of 1 percent of that bill, while food stamps have grown almost 70 percent. It is a bad deal.

Obamacare should be repealed and replaced. It has caused 2.5 million jobs to be lost, cut $700 billion from Medicare, and resulted in canceled policies for thousands of Arkansans despite a promise that people could keep plans they liked. We can repeal Obamacare and trust patients and doctors. We can let you shop for insurance across state lines, allow small businesses to negotiate together for lower premiums and allow states to run Medicare.

If we look at what’s happening in the Islamic State, they are rampaging across the region. They are killing Americans. They are burying people alive. This is happening because Barack Obama failed to take the advice of his generals in 2011 when they asked for a small stay-behind force. We allowed al-Qaida in the area to regroup. We need is to take it seriously. No commander-in-chief would ever take any option off the table, including troops on the ground because the Islamic State certainly isn’t taking any options off the table.

Mark Swaney

Swaney, who was born in Oak Harbor, Wash., has worked at the University of Arkansas for nearly two decades. A 1980 graduate of the university, he earned a master’s degree in mechanical engineering there in 1992. He began working at UA in 1995. He joined the Green Party in 2000 and was a candidate for Arkansas House of Representatives in 2010. Swaney, who is divorced, has two children, Zack and Pearl.

The Farm Bill should cover agriculture and nutrition policies. I support the food stamp program. It is unconscionable that members of Congress who would give away billions of dollars of advantages to the richest in the country think it is terrible that some people are getting food to eat. As for farm subsidies, too much goes to wealthy farmers and not enough priority is put on encouraging good environmental practices.

The Affordable Care Act is better than nothing. It is helping very low-income individuals receive health care at an affordable rate. But, the law has failed to help moderate income families afford premiums and done nothing to rein in the cost of medicine. Instead, we should move to a national health plan that takes the insurance industry out of medicine and provide basic health care as a public right.

I support military action to destroy the Islamic State and Congress needs to authorize it. We need to defend the United States from attack and also put an end to mass human rights violations in Syria and Iraq. We also need support from the United Nations and other Islamic countries — that support should also include helping to pay the cost because ISIS is a threat to the entire world not merely the United States.

Nathan LaFrance

LaFrance is a senior manager of energy strategy at Wal-Mart in Bentonville. He is a 2000 graduate of Pennsylvania State University, and earned an MBA from the University of Delaware in 2005. He and his wife, Cindy, have six daughters ages 2 to 14. This is his first political campaign.

The Farm Bill should be eliminated. The U.S. Constitution does not give the federal government authority to shift income from one group to another. Those struggling to make ends meet should be dealt with in the private sector by private charitable organizations. Let us decide what causes are best, not politicians in Washington. The American people are compassionate enough to help others.

The Affordable Care Act needs to be repealed in its entirety. It has been a disaster. Health care costs are skyrocketing and doctors are now focused on complying with federal regulations rather than providing patient care. We need to get government out of the health care industry.

The Islamic State is a threat that must be responded to but not unilaterally. There must be a multi-country effort to take care of these terrorists and allow the region to control its own future. We also need to pause and realize that this began with the Bush administration’s decision to invade Iraq and overthrow Saddam Hussein. That left a significant power vacuum that we are still dealing with. We helped install a prime minister that did not bring the country together. ISIS has gained because of that division.