Close to Change “The path to sustainable healthcare is in sight, but we need to effect change within ourselves for it to be successful.” - Dr. Matt Lambert

Dr. Matt Lambert decided to write a book when heard that his hometown hospital was closing. The local announcement stated that upcoming changes established by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act were part of the reason for the closure. As a physician and a healthcare consultant whose life and career have been greatly impacted by the same legislation, Dr. Lambert was moved to take a closer look. But while looking at the history of the hospital and his hometown, he was forced to look at his own history as well.

Dr. Lambert does much of his consulting work with electronic health records; his first thought was to look at his own medical records. This brought him back home to get his records and to interview old friends in order to learn more about the situation. As the story began to unfold, he realized that the closure had been a long time coming, and the stories he heard sounded very similar to other hospitals around the country; stories heard both as a clinician and a consultant.

In the book, Dr. Lambert reflects on personal experiences, healthcare and otherwise, and extrapolates these to other health systems facing similar changes. From there, the discussion turns to where we were are heading on a national scale and how that course will be influenced by our history and our policies. He says, “I was surprised at how personal the book turned out, but I think that being self-critical allowed me to be critical of Parkersburg, the healthcare industry, and our politics.” The book takes the viewpoint that to achieve transformation in the healthcare industry, a change is required not only in public opinion, but also in our behavior. Dr. Lambert says, “The path to sustainable healthcare is in sight, but we need to effect change within ourselves for it to be successful.”

The ebook is published by BookBaby and available on Amazon.com, Barnes & Noble, and iBooks.

About the Author

Matt Lambert, M.D. is an emergency medicine physician, healthcare consultant, musician, and author. He is a practicing clinician and works for Clinovations, a Washington, DC based healthcare consulting company at the intersection of healthcare delivery, policy, and technology. He plays music under the name of Doc Lambert and the Mountain City band and his releases include Hot Outada Oven, Tranquilo, and Tucker County Time. He has lived and practiced medicine from Hawaii to Washington, DC, where he currently resides when he is not in Davis, WV. For more information on Close to Change: http://on.fb.me/1hA3XGe

About BookBaby

BookBaby is a leading eBook publishing company for independent authors. The company offers a full array of services including eBook formatting, cover design, and distribution, as well as short run book printing. BookBaby is part of the AVL Digital family of businesses, which also includes Disc Makers, CD Baby, and HostBaby.