Topics: beverly johnson, bill cosby, Rape, Sexual assault, Vanity Fair, Life News

She was a young, beautiful model who moved in glamorous circles in the ’70s and ’80s. So maybe it’s not surprising she has a disturbing Bill Cosby story to tell.

In a powerful new essay in Vanity Fair, model Beverly Johnson says that in the mid-’80s, she was contacted by Bill Cosby’s people about doing a small role on his sitcom. She says he was charming and supportive when she met him – until a meeting in his home set off her alarm bells. “Cosby said he wanted to see how I handled various scenes,” she writes, “so he suggested that I pretend to be drunk. (When did a pregnant woman ever appear drunk on ‘The Cosby Show’? Probably never, but I went with it.)” Then, she says, he made her a cappuccino and “wouldn’t let it go” when she initially refused — so she obliged. Here’s where she says it gets really bad. Johnson admits that as a disco-era model, she knew her way around recreational substances. A few sips, and she says she could tell: “I’d been drugged — and drugged good.”

Johnson goes on to describe feeling woozy and her speech becoming slurred, while the comic meanwhile “put his hands around my waist.” That’s when she says she went into ” automatic-survival mode” and cursed him out. The rest, she says, is a blur, but as she recalls it, Cosby “yanked all 110 pounds of me down a bunch of stairs,” took her outside and put her in a taxi. She says she doesn’t remember how she got home, and that the effects of the experience took a few days to wear off.

Johnson confesses that though she considered confronting Cosby about the incident, she didn’t. “How could I fight someone that boldly arrogant and out of touch?” she says, “In the end, just like the other women, I had too much to lose to go after Bill Cosby.” But now she says, “as so many women have shared similar stories,” she’s been emboldened to do likewise.

Johnson’s anecdote is not as dramatic as many of the others that have thus far been heard – and continue to emerge. She does not claim to have been sexually assaulted or even really harassed. (Not that a claim that he drugged her is a small thing.) Her instincts and her memory about what happened to her with Cosby 30 years ago may be incorrect – that could, after all, have been an innocent, untainted beverage he handed her, and her reaction may have been unrelated. And by her own admission, she made a choice to stay silent for decades. Yet Johnson brings to the conversation yet another element — because she may be its most reliable source yet.