For Nashville’s health care titans, King vs. Burwell is very high stakes poker. (Photo: Steve Hix/Somos Images/Corbis)

What is a question worth? Try $1.7 billion. That’s the impact on the one-day market capitalization of HCA after the King vs. Burwell oral arguments before the United States Supreme Court.

King is the most recent challenge to the Affordable Care Act (ACA). In King , Mr. King and the other petitioners argue that the ACA federal tax credits to purchase health insurance are not available to states, such as Tennessee, that use the ACA federal exchange.

After oral argument, most Nashville health care stocks immediately rose several points. For example, HCA stock rose $4.14 per share; with over 420 million shares outstanding, that’s a $1.7 billion swing in market capitalization in one day (5.8 percent). That same day, Community Health Systems stock rose $3.13 (6.3 percent) and LifePoint Hospitals rose $2.60 (3.6 percent), resulting in hundreds of millions of dollars in market value for each.

What did Wall Street like about the oral argument? What lies ahead on this significant and valuable issue?

First, the question. During oral arguments, Justice Anthony Kennedy began a question with the following:

“From the standpoint of federalism, it does seem that there is something very powerful … the states are being told either create your Exchange, or we’ll send your insurance market into a death spiral.”

In Justice Kennedy’s words, “there’s a serious constitutional problem.”

Justice Kennedy’s questioning in King suggested that he might be viewing the “Exchange Mandate” in a manner similar to the “Medicaid Mandate” from the ACA sentinel holding in NFIB vs. Sebelius . The NFIB decision upheld the ACA Individual Mandate (4-1-4) under the Constitutional Taxing Power of the Congress. Additionally, the NFIB decision also held (7-2) that the “Medicaid Mandate” of the ACA (that states are required to expand Medicaid or lose all federal Medicaid funding), to be unconstitutionally coercive under the tenets of federalism (the balance of power between the federal and state governments).

In addition to Justice Kennedy, the questioning from Justices Breyer, Ginsburg, Sotomayor and Kagan suggest that four votes are firmly in the camp of sustaining the Obama administration’s interpretation of the ACA, i.e. that the tax subsidies are available to both the federal and state exchanges. This means that the federal government needs only one of the remaining five Justices to prevail. The markets’ spontaneous interpretation is that the one vote may be Justice Kennedy.

If the Supreme Court were to hold for King and the other petitioners, the stock market reaction would likely be swift and adverse. For Nashville’s health care titans, this case is very high stakes poker.

If the Supreme Court decision is adverse to the Obama administration, there is little likelihood that a Republican Congress will come to the rescue of the ACA. Likewise, after the quick dismissal of Insure Tennessee, there is little likelihood that the Tennessee governor and Tennessee General Assembly will volunteer to solve the problem by creating a Tennessee Insurance Exchange.

As the governor recently quipped, “this problem was created in Washington and it can be solved in Washington.” Accordingly, Nashville health care companies have a great deal riding on this case. Let’s hope Justice Kennedy’s questions are a true indicator of his likely position. For Nashville, billions of dollars in market capitalization may hang in the balance.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1bdI3In