A Phillipsburg School District administrator says outsourcing substitute teacher staffing has saved on more than just health-care costs.

On their face, charts that business administrator William Bauer prepared in response to an Open Public Records Act request suggest the district spent less on substitutes prior to contracting with Source4Teachers, but Bauer said that's not the case.

The district spent $684,426 in the 2013-14 school year, the first for which it entered into a contract with Source4Teachers, according to a table of numbers Bauer provided. That includes a $50,000 annual fee.

That's up from $493,778 the district spent on on substitute teachers during the 2011-12 school year and $439,166 in 2012-13 school year, according to the charts.

Bauer said he did not include the district's additional costs for the salaries, benefits and pensions to which about five long-term substitutes were entitled in the two school years before the district started using Source4Teachers.

Once a substitute worked more than 20 days in the same classroom teaching the same subject, the district placed him or her on the salary guide for a new teacher, Bauer said. That's in compliance with New Jersey Department of Education regulations.

Bauer estimates an average cost of $75,000, including benefits, for each new teacher the district hires. The median salary of a teacher in the district for the 2013-14 school year was $68,561, according to Department of Education data.

"As you can see by the numbers, it doesn't take a lot to create a lot of expense for the district," Bauer said.

The school board voted in September to renew its contract with Source4Teachers for another two years.

Superintendent George Chando said the daily placement rate of substitute teachers through Source4Teachers is almost equal to when the district handled the staffing internally, which is "very, very good" for a district Phillipsburg's size.

When a substitute is unavailable for a class, other teachers have to cover the class, usually during their preparation periods. Chando said the district has to pay teachers extra for that because of their contract.

"One of the benefits of using Source4Teachers is they have a larger pool of candidates for specific areas, especially at the secondary level," Chando said, noting the difficulty in staffing math and science classes. "Districts struggle to find candidates to fill permanent positions in those areas."

Phillipsburg used 5,414 substitutes last year compared to about 4,458 during the 2012-13 school year and 5,088 during the 2011-12 year.

The company bills the district $110.82 for a short-term substitute who makes $85 a day, according to a copy obtained via an OPRA request of the company's agreement with the district. The district also paid substitutes $85 a day prior to using Source4Teachers.

The company bills $162.98 a day for a long-term substitute, defined as one who works in a position for more than 20 days. Those substitutes earn $125 a day.

Administrators say new "Obamacare" regulations requiring employers to offer health insurance to employees who work more than 30 hours a week make it practical to outsource substitute teacher staffing. Keeping track of who is eligible for benefits is the company's responsibility, not Bauer's or his staff's, he said.

The company normally hires substitute teachers as part-time employees who work less than 30 hours per week, so they are ineligible. The district is required to pay a surcharge for the minimum health insurance plan for substitutes assigned to positions for more than 60 days, according to the agreement.