The first official Republican presidential debate of the 2016 race takes place in Cleveland Thursday, but Monday night most of the candidates — save frontrunner Donald Trump — gathered in New Hampshire to answer questions, one-by-one, about what they believed and what they’d do as president.

But most of the questions went unanswered.

The night was a parade of misdirection, canned talking points, and world-class ignoring of the moderator. Here are some highlights:

When asked what her worst decision as a leader was, Carly Fiorina went the “sometimes I care too much” route and said “the hardest decisions are where you challenge the status quo.” She did not mention any of those decisions, nor did she mention the time she fired 30,000 people when she was CEO of Hewlett-Packard.

When asked whether humans were responsible for climate change, Scott Walker replied, “I’m an Eagle Scout. We were taught to leave our campsite cleaner when we left it.” OK.

George Pataki was asked what three federal agencies he would eliminate. His choices: Obamacare, Common Core, and a 15 percent reduction in the federal workforce. None of those are federal agencies.



The moderator also asked Pataki who our tax code treated the most unfairly, to which he responded “veterans” who are only mentioned in the tax code when they receive additional benefits and breaks. He didn’t mention how they were treated unfairly with respect to taxes, but he did complain about the VA.

Ted Cruz was asked what his deal with Iran would look like, but instead of answering he called President Obama’s deal with Iran the greatest national security threat facing America.

When asked what kind of justice he would appoint to the Supreme Court, Ben Carson mentioned you don’t have to be a lawyer or judge to be a justice, which is true! And terrifying to think he would appoint someone completely unqualified.

The moderator also asked Rick Perry what agencies he’d eliminate, and everyone had a laugh over his famous 2012 flub of that question. This time he played it safe and ignored the question entirely.

Bobby Jindal‘s first two executive orders? He’ll overturn Obama’s executive orders (OK, that counts) and will tell the Joint Chiefs to… tell other countries we’re tough or something? That one was a real head-scratcher.

Rick Santorum was asked what the president’s role should be in determining the nation’s abortion policy, to which he naturally replied that the Supreme Court should not have legalized gay marriage.

Last Pataki one, I promise, but he was really something else. When asked if there should be any restrictions on gun ownership, he said he wouldn’t change the Second Amendment, but that we should “enforce our mental health laws.”

I’m starting to get what the Republicans see in Donald Trump.

Follow BNR on Twitter

ALSO READ: