Big Thompson Brewery hopes to open next month at 114 E. 15th St.

Loveland breweries Loveland's craft brewers, in the order that they opened: • Rock Bottom Brewery 6025 Sky Pond Drive • Grimm Brothers Brewhouse 623 N. Denver Ave. • Big Beaver Brewing Co. 2707 W. Eisenhower Blvd. • Loveland Aleworks 118 W. Fourth St. • Verboten Brewing 1550 Taurus Court • Buckhorn Brewers 4229 W. Eisenhower Blvd. • Climb Hard Cider Co. 2707 W. Eisenhower Blvd. • Crow Hop Brewing 217 E. Third St. • Big Thompson Brewery 114 E. 15th St.

Two years of work and waiting are coming to fruition as the owners of Loveland's newest craft brewery create their first batches and prepare to open their doors.

Big Thompson Brewery could welcome its first customers next month, said co-owner Kurt Biegel, although he doesn't have a firm date yet. The brewery at 114 E. 15th St., in the former Skate Castle building, already has approval to brew but is waiting for parking lot issues to be resolved so that it can get its certificate of occupancy from the city, he said.

Biegel and a consultant brewed Big Thompson's first two beers in late June — an American pale ale and an American pilsner. He wants to have another two to four beers ready when his taproom opens.

Advertisement

He bought a 10-barrel, semi-automated brewing system, which is significantly different from the equipment he uses as a homebrewer, so it has taken a while to get accustomed to a new setup, he said.

Kegs, bottles, cans

A 10-barrel brewhouse is larger than some craft breweries use when they start out, he said. The capacity to brew 20 kegs' worth at a time fits into his long-term business plan.

"We do want to be a production brewery and be able to package beer and sell beer out our back door ... in kegs or cans or bottles," Biegel said.

Originally, he said, he expected to start out selling his beer just in the taproom, then begin selling kegs to local restaurants and bars before putting the beer in cans after about a year. But he has been thinking about taking that step sooner because of the apparent interest that area businesses have in carrying local products.

No niche

Big Thompson Brewery won't stake out a niche for itself, Biegel said.

"We've talked about that a lot," he said. "A lot of our beers are similar to beers that the other guys brew. But our IPA won't be exactly the same as everybody else's.

"We do want to bring a couple of unique beers to the environment — we have a couple of recipes that I haven't seen anywhere else," he added.

Biegel said he started homebrewing about six years ago and early on said to his wife, "You know, this town could use a brewery or two." Within a month, he said, he read about Loveland's first independent craft brewery.

His recipes are mostly his own, he said — adapted from recipes he has found, and some that he came up with himself.

"That's one of the most fun things about it, getting a little creative," he said.

A chalkboard in the brewery shows another exercise in creativity: potential names of the company's beers, following themes of river, fishing, geographic locations and railroads (the BNSF Railway tracks run directly behind the building, which Biegel counts as an asset).

'There can never be enough'

Biegel is preparing to retire next month after more than 30 years with IBM. He co-owns Big Thompson Brewing Co., with his wife, Barbara, although she will remain mostly a silent partner, he said.

The proliferation of small breweries in town — Big Thompson will make eight, plus one cidery — is fine with Biegel.

"I don't view it as something that's daunting or challenging," he said. "We've visited all of them. They all brew good beer. Our beers have to be competitive."

Fort Collins is about twice the size of Loveland, he said, and it has almost 20 breweries.

"When you go around town and drink at all these breweries, everyone's got something a little different going on," he said. "There can never be enough good craft beer around for people to sample and drink."

The brewery's hours are under discussion but will generally be early afternoon to around 9 at night, seven days a week. Phone: 970-619-8138.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.