More than 1.1 million Californians who signed up for Obamacare plans through the state’s health insurance exchange will begin to receive renewal notices and can start testing an improved online system, officials said Thursday.

“This is our very first experience with renewal, and we will learn things during this process just as we learned a great deal about open enrollment during 2013-2014,” Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California, said during a teleconference.

“We do believe many significant improvements have been made that will assist our consumers during both renewal and open enrollment this year.”

Lee said of the 1.14 million who enrolled into health care plans through Covered California, about 150,000 eventually lost their coverage.

During the first enrollment period, which lasted six months, consumers chose health plans based on the metal plans: Bronze, Silver, Gold or Platinum level of coverages.

Lee said those who are renewing can stay with their plan or pick a new one. He encouraged them to begin shopping now and renew early so that coverage can begin on Jan. 1. Lee said consumers will see that the cost of some premiums of those carriers that have offered plans on the exchange will have increased by 4 percent while others have fallen.

Meanwhile, Covered California is preparing for open enrollment to begin on Nov. 15 for those who want to purchase a health care plan for the first time. Enrollment will run through Dec. 15. The goal is to enroll 500,000 new insurance holders in three months, Lee said.

He admitted that would be a greater challenge than the first enrollment.

“Consumers will only have three months to enroll, compared with the six months they had last time,” he said. “This is complicated by our knowledge that many who are uninsured have adapted to a culture of coping and have become accustomed to living without health insurance.”

Under provisions of the Affordable Care Act signed by President Obama in 2010, all Americans must be covered under a health insurance plan or be penalized at tax time.

The first enrollment period was a bumpy one for both states that opened their own health insurance exchanges and for the federal government.

But Lee said many lessons were learned from those first six months.

“We didn’t do everything perfectly,” he said. “We’re taking those lessons and applying them to open enrollment.”

Among those improvements are an increase in representatives to handle calls. Consumers waited too long, Lee said. This time, 1,300 representatives will be on phones, and there will be those who can offer help in Spanish, Mandarin, and Korean among other languages. When open enrollment launched last year, there were fewer than 400 representatives, which overwhelmed the system.

Advertisement

In addition, most technical glitches with the website have been worked out, but the website will be down on Sundays for the next few weeks, Lee said.

There also will be certified representative at 200 storefronts across California, improving what Lee called that one-on-one relationship that so many people needed during last enrollment. He also said more resources would be spent to reach out to the Latino, African-American and Asian communities.

Those who have health coverage through Medi-Cal can renew their coverage throughout year, on a rolling monthly schedule, and Medi-Cal will contact them directly.

“We are extremely excited about the changes we have put in place, and we look forward to building on the enthusiasm around open enrollment this year as we did last year,” Lee said.

“At the same time, we know we have more work to do. We want Covered California to deliver best-in-class customer service, and we know we’re not there yet. But we’re getting better every week, and we will continue to learn and improve.”