Buy Photo Paul A. Sabalis of the Army Corps of Engineers points out on a map the area where dunes will be created. Weather permitting, work could begin this weekend on a project to protect Port Monmouth from coastal flooding.. (Photo: Press file photo )Buy Photo Story Highlights Beaches within 500 feet of sand placement work will be closed to the public

The fishing pier will be open for about three more weeks and then it will be shut down for seven or eight months. When it reopens, the pier will be longer.

Work could begin as soon as today on the first phase of a $110 million project to protect Port Monmouth against coastal flooding like it experienced during superstorm Sandy.

Federal officials, including Rep. Frank J. Pallone Jr., D-N.J., and Col. Paul Owen, commander of the New York District of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, were at the site Friday morning to mark the beginning of the first leg of construction, which is expected to cost $17.7 million.

David Gentile, project manager for the corps, told the Asbury Park Press on Thursday that the contractor could begin placing sand on the beach as soon as today, weather permitting. According to Pallone’s office, an estimated 400,000 cubic yards of sand will be used in the beach replenishment, as well as the restoration and construction of protective dunes.

They expect sand placement to take 40 days, Gentile said, and during that time the beach will be closed off 500 feet in either direction of where work is taking place. The pumping of sand will begin near the Seabrook Wilson House and move east until reaching the Dunes at Shoal Creek condominium complex.

That will enable them to keep the fishing pier, which is being extended as part of this work, open for another three weeks, Gentile said. At that point, the fishing pier will be closed for seven to eight months, he added.

This is one of 11 coastal flood-mitigation projects that the Department of Environmental Protection and the Army corps are working on. The price tag could approach $1 billion, DEP commissioner Bob Martin said.

Township officials have said Sandy damaged 750 homes in the Port Monmouth section of the township, with 200 of those homes substantially damaged. The Port Monmouth Fire Company was flooded with more than 3 feet of water, though the volunteer department remained operational after the storm and served as a hub for donating and distributing food and supplies.

Russ Zimmer: 732-557-5748, razimmer@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/monmouth-county/sandy-recovery/2014/06/13/sandy-port-monmouth-monmouth-county/10489249/