Editor’s note: The stories in an original version of this post have been updated and merged into the piece below. The stories were reported by Ray Leszcynski, Naomi Martin, Meredith Shamburger, Joe Simnacher, Valerie Wigglesworth and Hannah Wise with contribution from Tasha Tsiaperas.

The sky fell first in the south, mangling neighborhoods in Ellis County and Glenn Heights, then lifting again to drift harmlessly past the bulk of Dallas.

Sirens downtown howled after the storm, but it would save its worst for the north.

The air over Lake Ray Hubbard was still when Gary Tucker and his girlfriend walked out of the Bass Pro Shops in Garland on Saturday evening.

Looking back, as a survivor of the deadliest touchdown of the night, he realizes the quiet was a warning.

“It was dead calm,” said Tucker, 52. “We could even hear in the real far distance, what sounded like a train. But it was was real far.”

The radio warned the couple to take cover as they drove away from the lake, toward Tucker’s home in Wylie. But they figured the danger zone was too broad to worry about.

Tucker was about to turn off the Interstate 30 service road onto the George Bush Turnpike when the tornado proved him wrong.

He heard a succession of booms. He saw a riding lawnmower fly by. Lumber and debris shot past at what seemed like 100 mph.

Tucker pulled the pickup over and the couple got down as low their seat belts would let them.

And then they were flying too.

“The truck lifted just literally straight up off the ground,” Tucker said. “It came straight off the ground and we both blacked out.”



When they came to, the truck seemed to have tumbled about 20 feet. Tucker heard a voice outside: “Are you guys OK? Are you guys OK?”

They crawled out the rear window. His girlfriend would need stitches, and she was lucky.

At the same interesection, bodies lay in vehicles that night.

The storm killed eight and hit an estimated 600 buildings before it left the Garland area. Sometimes it would spare one home to level another across the street.

Janie Villalon, 36, had stir fry on the stove when she noticed the TV spaz out. Her husband opened the door. “I think that’s a—” he said.

Villalon cut him off. She knew what it was; a tornado had hit her house in Pampa in the 1990s.

“Take cover,” she yelled, and the couple ran and clinged to cupboards in the bathroom. The building shook and windows shattered as the twister passed, taking the roof off their apartment.

Not far away, a bright blue flash interrupted movie night at the Kongs’ house—possibly a transformer exploding outside.

“Whoa, is that for real?” thought Andy Kong.

His wife saw debris flying up into the sky, slammed the door and grabbed her baby.

The family turned a sofa over and climbed underneath it while tree branches rained in the living room. By the time the storm left Garland, cars had flown and the Kongs’ deaf chihuahua was gone.

***

The tornado rippled northeast over Lake Ray Hubbard as Rachel Portillo, her husband, their 16-year-old son, a golden retriever and a schnauzer all took shelter in their house on a peninsula.

“It’s amazing how many people fit in the bathtub when you’re scared,” Portillo said.

Ten minutes later, the storm had cleared the lake and was tearing through southeastern Rowlett.

Natalya Cherry and her husband were out of town with her in-laws that night, absorbed in a football game, oblivious to the alerts blowing up their cellphones.

When the game ended, Cherry took a call: Come home. It’s bad.

The couple left their 8-year-old with the in-laws and drove nearly 200 miles back to Rowlett, arriving to find their roof blown off and their son’s room gone.

And the storm had not stopped there.

“It was the scariest thing we’ve ever lived through,” Melissa Skains said.

The tornado had pushed her and her two daughters along one wall as it ransacked their home in Farmersville. Her husband pushed them into a bathroom.

And then the wind let them go.

“After it was all done, we all jumped up,” she said. “We were so happy … Then we realized there were no walls.”

The tornado continued to slash across Collin County, killing a baby in Blue Ridge before it evaporated back into the night.

All told, Saturday’s storm cut a 70-mile trail from Faith Lane in Waxahachie, across two lakes and past Copeville, leaving behind countless stories of luck and loss, close calls and catastrophe.

The next morning, worshippers gathered at Harvest Praise Ministry in Glenn Heights. They gathered under an awning, which was the only thing left of their small church.

As it began its march north, the storm had come as a high-pitched whistle that tore out the church’s roof and walls. But it did not touch the awning, nor the cross affixed to it, nor the pastor’s wife who had sheltered beneath it.

For Sunday’s service, pastor Kevin Taylor stood in the bed of a truck hemmed in by debris and addressed his congregation: “We built this with our hands, and we will do it again.”

Cold rain poured down, and the youngest of the members sheltered the oldest from the wind.

Complete coverage of the storm’s devastation

‘Total devastation’: Residents, emergency crews work frantically after tornadoes

Tornado in Rowlett classified as EF3; 11 confirmed dead in storms in Garland, Collin County

Officials identify six of eight tornado victims who died in Garland

Storm damages over 100 buildings in Glenn Heights

Floyd: Weather’s tragic capriciousness is still beyond our control

NBC5: Staff shortage left NWS scrambling to cover tornado outbreak

Colliding weather systems caused tornado outbreak

Gov. Abbott offers condolences, says state is taking action in midst of storms

Rescue workers assessing damage, needs in wake of tornadoes across North Texas

Tracking the storm

Interactive map shows storm’s route of destruction in North Texas

After the storm: Before and after images of the damage done by December tornadoes in North

Video, photos, tweets show massive damage tornadoes brought to North Texas

Updated photos: Daylight reveals damage from D-FW holiday season storm

El Paso to East Texas: Widespread images/video of extreme weather shake social media

Tales from the damage

Heartbreaking call during storm was Mesquite couple’s last

Survivor stories: Ruined churches, a flying lawnmower and a truck ride through the air

Editorial: What’s stronger than even catastrophic tornadoes? North Texans

Video: Glenn Heights family reunited with dog after tornado

Children hide under mattress as house falls around them

Resources

How you can help | How to get help

Resources for tracking lost pets in North Texas storms

Shelters are popping up in wake of tornado damage across North Texas

Watchdog: In tornado’s wake, protect yourself from bad builders’ scams

Check here for pet shelter updates

Managing traumatic stress after a tornado