Freezing cold apartments, a leaking roof, exposed pipes, broken windows, missing stair railing posts, a broken main door, bedbugs and cockroaches.

This is just part of the list of problems tenants of a 13-storey apartment building at 150 Sanford Ave. N. at Huron Street have been living with for months.

There are numerous property standards and fire code orders against the building. The city's public health department is expected to issue an order this week for bedbug and cockroach treatment under the pest section of the Property Standards Act.

Frustrated by alleged inaction by building management or ownership, a group of tenants have mobilized — by striking committees — trying to eliminate fire hazards, and cleaning up piles and piles of garbage. When they cleaned up garbage that had been tossed into the back yard, it filled a large dumpster bin, which was hauled away. Another one sits more than half full. The fire shaft was filled with garbage up to the sixth floor.

Lynn Oerlemans sits on the direct action committee; one of two committees conceived at a Dec. 29 meeting with Ward 3 Councillor Matthew Green. They spend time every day cleaning up.

Oerlemans has lived in the building for nearly a year and says she, like many of the residents at 150 Sanford, can't afford to move. Despite buying and applying spray herself she has bedbugs and has seen cockroaches coming out of electrical sockets.

"It's disgusting," she said.

The committees met again Saturday, giving Green a tour of the 13-storey property. They show him exposed pipes on the top floor's ceiling, and ice on the bottom level's floor.

Green said he's impressed with their work, but noted there's still a lot of costly work that needs to be done.

"The goal is making the place livable," he said.

The phone number listed as building management is not in service.

According to bylaw orders posted on the building, it's owned by Tourbillon Facility Inc., which has a North York address. A representative for the corporation could not be reached.

Green, who has been working with the tenants to itemize their concerns, said he is meeting with an owner on Monday.

Keith Brink says there has been a steady decline of the building over the past six months. Despite having his apartment sprayed, bed bugs have come back and his apartment is very cold.

Sam Macbeth has had problems with everything from his toilet to electrical issues that go months without being addressed. He says when he calls the emergency number given to tenants, he is told to call the management office — a number that is not in service.

Macbeth has resorted to fixing things himself and says while he appreciates the organized cleanups and other work being done by other tenants, these issues should be taken care of by building management and owners.

"Why is it our job?" he said.