How many American children have to die in deference to the Democrats’ voter-importation demographic-warfare effort? We often hear that you have to break a few eggs to make an omelet, but how much Ebola, enterovirus D68 (EV-D68), Chagas disease, malaria, and tuberculosis is an acceptable price to pay to maintain Barack Obama’s open-borders-über-alles policy? These are relevant questions now, especially with a recent report confirming what was always just common sense:

Little Eli Waller will never grow up to be president. The four-year-old New Jersey boy will never grow up to be anything, because enterovirus D68 took his life – quite possibly because a boy who did grow up to be president, but not really a man, invited the virus into our country.

The deadly EV-D68 epidemic in America was likely the result of Obama’s insistence on flooding our country with tens of thousands of illegal-alien minors.

Reports Neil Munro at The Daily Caller, “The evidence includes admissions from top health officials that the epidemic included multiple strains of the virus, and that it appeared simultaneously in multiple independent locations.”

This isn’t something hard to prove or disprove. All you need do is ascertain if the strain prevalent in the U.S. is the same as one found south of the border. This is simple epidemiology, and there’s only one reason we don’t know:

The powers that be don’t want us to know.

Can you imagine the revolutionary uproar that would have ensued if, just when EV-D68 was big in the news, it had been revealed that Obama’s lawless abdication of his responsibility had led to American deaths?

Can you imagine what would be said if it were proven that Obama has blood on his hands?

And let’s consider the EV-D68 toll to this point. As Munro writes:

So far, that virus has been found in nine people — including at least three American kids — who died from illness. It has apparently inflicted unprecedented polio-like paralysis in roughly 50 kids, and it has put hundreds of young American kids into hospital emergency wards and intensive care units throughout more than 40 states. Most of the dead have not been publicly identified.

This, not to mention the toll taken by Ebola and the others diseases brought in by Obama’s strengthening diversifiers.

And how serious is the conspiracy of silence on the EV-D68 issue? Munro reports that a “series of government researchers, health experts and academics refused to comment, or else urged self-censorship, when they were pressed by TheDC for statistical and scientific data that would exonerate Obama and his deputies.” One of these is Columbia University researcher and top EV-D68 expert Rafal Tokarz, who, as he put it, “would really rather not comment.” Another is Professor Lone Simonsen, research director of George Washington University’s Global Epidemiology Program, whose cop-out was “I would just steer away from that – it is not helpful, so why bring it up?”

Answer: because if Americans know that a given policy allowed EV-D68’s spread, they’ll realize the policy isn’t helpful and needs to be changed.

But this certainly is not helpful to Simonsen. As Munro pointed out, perpetuating the invasion of our country “is a top priority for the Democratic leaders, who have the power to make life difficult for grant-dependent American scientists who discover politically damaging information.”

Money, by the way, is part of the root of today’s scientific evil. As to the significance of this factor, consider that BMJ.com (formerly the British Medical Journal) reported in 2012, “One in seven UK based scientists or doctors has witnessed colleagues intentionally altering or fabricating data during their research or for the purposes of publication[.]” (In case you were wondering, this is how you get Al Gorleone’s gaggle of greedy global-warming gangsters.)

So we have here a confluence of scientific malpractice and political malpractice. And this brings us to Munro’s quoting of scientist and Enterovirus Foundation board member Nora Chapman: “Epidemics happen when populations mix, or when viruses mutate and combine to overcome peoples’ evolved immune defenses[.]”

Or when populations are mixed.

As when a president seeds various parts of the country with his carriers and redistributes disease. Hey, why keep the epidemic all in one place?

But don’t expend all your energy worrying about EV-D68 – save some of it for worrying about Ebola, of which scientists now predict there will be approximately 130 U.S. cases by year’s end.

And how many next year?

How much blood will Obama have on his hands then?

If you think the ObamaCare disaster is bad, wait 'til you see the one wrought by ObamaDoesn’tCare.

Contact Selwyn Duke, follow him on Twitter or log on to SelwynDuke.com.