Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share People from different organization and churches came together Saturday morning to protest Planned Parenthood in Louisville.

Buy Photo Protesters pray as they protest against Planned Parenthood and abortions outside the Planned Parenthood's Louisville Health Center in Louisville, Kentucky. October 10, 2015 (Photo: John Sommers II, John Sommers II/Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

About 100 anti-abortion protesters decried the federal funding of Planned Parenthood during a rally Saturday, waving sometimes graphic signs in front of the Second Street clinic while neighborhood residents, some clearly disconcerted, looked on.

This is the second such rally in recent months in front of Planned Parenthood's Louisville location, which does not perform abortions, although it does offer abortion referral, according to the Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky website.

A larger crowd of protesters paraded on the sidewalk on Aug. 22 to call for the defunding of the reproductive health clinics and to pray for the elimination of abortion in the United States.

The rallies follow the release earlier this year of secretly-recorded videos that showed Planned Parenthood officials seemingly describing how they sometimes harvest and distribute fetal tissue to researchers.

The videos, released by California-based anti-abortion group Center for Medical Progress, have prompted some to accuse Planned Parenthood of profiting off the sale of fetal tissue. In the wake of the release of the videos, some states like Missouri, Florida and Indiana launched investigations, and the U.S. House of Representatives held hearings, although there has been no finding so far that Planned Parenthood illegally profited from fetal tissue donations.

Yet the videos have stirred up anti-abortion activists and brought renewed calls from some to end federal funds to Planned Parenthood.

Saturday's event in Louisville was one of hundreds that were planned for Planned Parenthood locations across the country, according to a press release from organizers.

"We're trying to keep the momentum going. ... We want to keep a national spotlight on this," John Sohl, president of Louisville's Pro-Life Future and one of the organizers of Saturday's rally, said as he stood in front of a sign that included the hashtag #PPsellsbabyparts.

"This is the human rights issue of our generation," Sohl said about abortions.

Supporters cheered as several people spoke passionately during the rally against abortions, with some sharing personal stories.

Peggy Strange, director of Silent No More Louisville, shared her story of getting an abortion and regretting it during Saturday's rally.

"What is at stake is your baby and your heart," Strange said, urging the group to continue to fight for the elimination of abortions.

As she spoke, one man in the crowd noticed a Planned Parenthood employee looking down on the group from a window, and he angrily wagged his finger at her. During other parts of Saturday's rally, a man in the nearby Baptist Tower could be heard yelling for the anti-abortion group to leave.

No Kentucky Planned Parenthood location performs abortions, although four clinics in Indiana offer the service.

Beth Headrick, director of communications for Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky, said six Indiana centers and two in Kentucky receive federal money through the National Family Planning Title X program, which pays for things like cancer screenings, contraceptives and testing for sexually transmitted diseases.

None of those centers receiving federal money perform abortions, Headrick said.

"The protests are designed to intimidate patients who are seeking basic health care," Headrick said. "Women should be able to get health care without fear of violence or harassment or intimidation."

Reporter Allison Ross can be reached at (502) 582-4241.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RAaAaA