Likely Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush delivered the commencement address at one of the country's most prominent evangelical Christian schools on Saturday, taking aim at critics of religion and 'the latest secular dogmas'.

The former Florida governor, who is widely expected to announce his candidacy for the 2016 presidential election, spoke at Liberty University in Virginia, founded by late Southern Baptist televangelist Jerry Falwell.

Standing on the dais with university president and Falwell's son Jerry Jr, Bush praised Christianity while criticizing the use of 'coercive federal power' to enforce policies against believers.

Scroll down for video

Jeb Bush, widely considered the front-runner for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, delivered a commencement address to the conservative Christian Liberty University on Saturday

Standing on a dias with televangelist Jerry Falwell's son Jerry Jr (right), Bush praised Christianity and criticized the Obama administration stance on religious liberty in laws such as the Affordable Care Act

Bush spent a section of his 20-minute remarks, obtained in full by Daily Mail Online, discussing the Little Sisters of the Poor.

The group of Catholic nuns is challenging the Affordable Care Act's provision that employers insurance plans must include coverage for contraception that they oppose on religious grounds.

'I’m betting that when it comes to doing the right and good thing, the Little Sisters of the Poor know better than the regulators at the Department of Health and Human Services,' Bush said of the law commonly known as Obamacare.

'From the standpoint of religious freedom, you might even say it’s a choice between the Little Sisters and Big Brother – and I’m going with the Sisters.'

Speaking to an assembled crowd of 34,000, Bush lashed out against what he sees as pressure to 'genuflect to the latest secular dogmas'.

'Somebody here is being small-minded and intolerant, and it sure isn’t the nuns, ministers, and laymen and women who ask only to live and practice their faith.'

He said that the Obama administration had an 'aggressive stance' against religious freedom.

Republican presidential hopefuls' stances on the rights of religious believers has become a much-talked about topic ahead of next year's primaries.

The debate has been sparked by challenges to the Obama administration's signature healthcare law and perceived discrimination against gay people in Indiana's law guaranteeing 'religious freedom' to business owners.

Liberty University, which is known for its politically active and conservative Christian students, is a popular campaign stop among Republican presidential hopefuls

Bush spoke to an estimated 34,000 people as he tried to woo evangelical voters and said that the Christian voice 'sometimes isn’t heard enough'

Bush is viewed as less conservative than other candidates in the GOP field on issues such as gay marriage, though he made efforts to appeal to the party's conservative base on Saturday.

The younger brother of George W Bush, who converted to Catholicism his wife was raised with, praised Christianity at the Liberty University speech.

He said that while religion is sometimes seen as a 'backward and oppressive force', it is invaluable in fighting poverty and trying to be 'protectors of creation' in 'America’s environmental debates'.

Bush, who has raised far more money than his potential primary challengers and is considered a front-runner, said that the Christian voice 'sometimes isn’t heard enough'.

Liberty University has hosted many Republican candidates in the past, according to the Washington Post.

Mitt Romney was one of the institution's commencement speakers in 2012, following on an appearance by John McCain in 2008.

Republican senator Ted Cruz of Texas kicked off his presidential campaign in March with a speech at the school, which is known for its conservative and politically active students.

Other candidates are expected to make appearances at Liberty University as their campaigns continue.

'Several of them are figuring out right now, when is their Liberty appearance?' Victoria Cobb, president of the Family Foundation of Virginia, said.

THE 2016 FIELD: WHO'S IN AND WHO'S THINKING IT OVER More than two dozen people from America's two major political parties are considered potential presidential candidates in the 2016 election. Eight – including two women, an African-American and two Latinos – have formally entered the race. A long list of others are biding their time and assessing their chances. REPUBLICANS IN THE RACE Ben Carson Retired Physician Age: 63 Religion: Seventh-day Adventist Base: Evangelicals Résumé: Famous pediatric neurosurgeon, youngest person to head a major Johns Hopkins Hospital division. Created a charity that awards scholarships to children of good character. Education: B.A. Yale University. M.D. University of Michigan Medical School. Family: Married to Candy Carson (1975), with three adult sons. The Carsons live in Maryland with Ben's elderly mother Sonya, who was a seminal influence on his life and development. Claim to fame: Carson spoke at a National Prayer Breakfast in 2013, railing against political correctness and condemned Obamacare – with President Obama sitting just a few feet away. Achilles heel: Carson is inflexibly conservative, opposing gay marriage and once saying gay attachments formed in prison provided evidence that sexual orientation is a choice.

Carly Fiorina Former CEO Age: 60 Religion: Episcopalian Base: Conservatives Résumé: Former CEO of Hewett-Packard, former group president of Lucent Technologies, onetime US Senate candidate in California Education: B.A. Stanford University. UCLA School of Law (did not finish). M.B.A. University of Maryland. M.Sci. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Family: Married to Frank Fiorina (1985), with two adult step-daughters. Divorced from Todd Bartlem (1977-1984). Claim to fame: Fiorina was the first woman to lead a Fortune 20 company, something that could provide key ammunition against the Democratic Partys' drive to make Hillary Clinton the first female president. Achilles heel: Fiorina's unceremonious firing by HP's board has led to questions about her management and leadership styles. And her only political experience has been a failed Senate bid in 2010 against Barbara Boxer. Mike Huckabee Former Arkansas governor Age: 59 Religion: Southern Baptist Base: Evangelicals Résumé: Former governor and lieutenant governor of Arkansas, former Fox News Channel host, ordained minister, author Education: B.A. Ouachita Baptist University. Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary (did not finish). Family: Married to Janet Huckabee (1974), with three adult children. Mrs. Huckabee is a survivor of spinal cancer. Claim to fame: 'Huck' is a political veteran and has run for president before, winning the Iowa Caucuses in 2008 and finishing second for the GOP nomination behind John McCain. He's known as an affable Christian and built a huge following on his weekend television program. Achilles heel: Huckabee may have a problem with female voters. He complained in 2014 about Obamacare's contraception coverage, saying Democrats want women to 'believe that they are helpless without Uncle Sugar.' And in 2015 he earned scorn for hawking herbal supplements in infomercials as a diabetes cure. Ted Cruz Texas senator Age: 44 Religion: Southern Baptist Base: Tea partiers Résumé:US senator, Texas solicitor general, US Supreme Court clerk, associate deputy attorney general under President George W. Bush Education: B.A. Princeton University. J.D. Harvard Law School. Family: Married to Heidi Nelson Cruz (2001), with two young daughters. His father is a preacher and he has two half-sisters. Claim to fame: Cruz spoke on the Senate floor for 21 hours in September 2013 to protest the inclusion of funding for Obamacare in a federal budget bill. Achilles heel: Cruz's father Rafael, a Texas preacher, is a tea party firebrand who has said gay marriage is a government conspiracy and called President Barack Obama a Marxist who should 'go back to Kenya.'

Rand Paul Kentucky senator Age: 52 Religion: Presbyterian Base: Libertarians Résumé: US senator, board-certified ophthalmologist, congressional campaign manager for his father Ron Paul Education: Baylor University (did not finish). M.D. Duke University School of Medicine. Family: Married to Kelley Ashby (1990), with three sons. His father is a former Texas congressman who ran for president three times but never got close to grabbing the brass ring. Claim to fame: Paul embraces positions that are at odds with most in the GOP, including anti-interventionist foreign policy, criminal drug sentencing reform for African-Americans and limits on government electronic surveillance. Achilles heel: Paul's politics are aligned with those of his father, whom mainstream GOPers saw as kooky. Both Pauls have advocated for a brand of libertarianism that forces government to stop domestic surveillance programs and limits foreign interventions. Marco Rubio Florida senator Age: 43 Religion: Roman Catholic Base: Conservatives Résumé: US senator, speaker of the Florida House of Representatives, city commissioner of West Miami Education: B.A. University of Florida. J.D. University of Miami School of Law. Family: Married to Jeanette Dousdebes (1998), with two sons and two daughters. Jeanette is a former Miami Dolphins cheerleader who posed for the squad’s first swimsuit calendar. Claim to fame: Rubio's personal story as the son of Cuban emigres is a powerful narrative, and helped him win his Senate seat in 2010 against a well-funded governor whom he initially trailed by 20 points. Achilles heel: Rubio was part of a bipartisan 'gang of eight' senators who crafted an Obama-approved immigration reform bill in 2013 which never became law – a move that angered conservative Republicans. And he was criticized in 2011 for publicly telling a version of his parents' flight from Cuba that turned out to appear embellished. DEMOCRATS IN THE RACE Hillary Clinton Former sec. of state Age: 67 Religion: United Methodist Base: Liberals Résumé: Secretary of state, US senator, US first lady, Arkansas first lady, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville law faculty Education: B.A. Wellesley College. J.D. Yale Law School. Family: Clinton's husband Bill was the 42nd President of the United States. Their daughter Chelsea is marreid to investment banker Marc Mezvinsky, whose mother was a one-term Pennsylvania congresswoman in the 1990s. Claim to fame: Clinton was the first US first lady with a postgraduate degree and presaged Obamacare with a failed attempt at health care reform in the 1990s. Achilles heel: A long series of financial and ethical scandals has dogged Clinton, including recent allegations that her husband and their family foundation benefited financially from decisions she made as secretary of state. And her performance surrounding the 2012 terror attack on a State Department facility in Benghazi, Libya, has been catnip for conservative Republicans. Bernie Sanders* Vermont senator Age: 73 Religion: Judaism Base: Far-left progressives Résumé: US senator, US congressman, mayor of Burlington, Vermont Education: B.A. University of Chicago. Family: Sanders is married to Jane O’Meara Sanders (1988), a former president of Burlington College. They have one child and three more from Mrs. Sanders' previous marriage. His brother Larry is a Green Party politician in the UK and formerly served on the Oxfordshire County Council. Claim to fame: Sanders is an unusually blunt, and unapologetic pol, happily promoting progressivism without hedging. He is also the longest-serving 'independent' member of Congress – neither Democrat nor Republican. Achilles heel: Sanders describes himself as a 'democratic socialist.' At a time of huge GOP electoral gains, his far-left ideas don't poll well. He favors open borders, single-payer universal health insurance, and greater government control over media ownership. * Sanders will run as a Democrat but has no party affiliation in the Senate. REPUBLICANS IN THE HUNT Jeb Bush, former Florida governor Bush has a father and a brother who occupied the Oval Office, and the capacity to raise massive amounts of campaign cash. He has alienated conservatives, though, by embracing immigration reform and 'Common Core' education standards. Chris Christie, New Jersey governor Pugnacious and unapologetic, Christie would bring an ego-driven brashness to the race – although his abrasive style and echos of his 'Bridgegate' scandal might ultimately sink him. Lindsey Graham, South Carolina senator Graham was a non-factor until a March summit in Iowa where he stole the show and put himself on the map. Arizona Sen. John McCain has praised him as the best person to help right America's foreign-relations ship Bobby Jindal, Louisiana governor Jindal's main claim to fame is his strident opposition to federal-level 'Common Core' education standards, which included a federal lawsuit that a judge dismissed in late March. John Kasich, Ohio governor Kasich is a popular governor in the battleground Buckeye State, but has little name-recognition elsewhere. He has accommodated liberals on some issues and could be seen as a more palatable version of Jeb Bush for Republicans who are anxious about electing a family dynasty.

DEMOCRATS IN THE HUNT Joe Biden, U.S. vice president Biden would be a natural candidate as the White House's sitting second-banana, but his reputation as a one-man gaffe factory will keep Democrats from taking him seriously. Jerry Brown, California governor Brown has been a presidential candidate three times and earned the nickname 'Moonbeam' for his liberal policy ideas. Today he's seen as a centrist but is likely leaning against another run. Lincoln Chafee, former Rhode Island gov. Chafee is a Republican-turned-Democrat who has launched a presidential exploratory committee and has distinguished himself from most in his party by attacking Hillary Clinton. Martin O'Malley, former Maryland governor O'Malley is a guitar-playing everyman who had limited success as his state's chief executive, showing political weakness by failing to secure a victory for his hand-picked successor. George Pataki, former New York governor Pataki is a long shot with almost zero name-recognition outside his home state, but he pared down the size of the state government and cut taxes during 12 years in office. He toyed with a run in 2012 but ultimately decided against it. Rick Perry, former Texas governor Perry was a top-tier candidate in 2012 until his 'Oops!' moment in a debate, when he couldn't remember one of his own policy positions. He now also faces a criminal indictment in Texas over tenuous claims that he abused his power. Rick Santorum, former Pennsylvania sen. Santorum is a perennial White House hopeful who won the GOP Iowa Caucuses in 2012 on the strength of ceaseless retail campaigning. He's best known as a religious-right crusader. Scott Walker, Wisconsin governor Walker built his national fame on the twin planks of turning his state's budget shortfalls into surpluses and beating back a labor union-led drive to force him out of office. Both results have broad appeal in the GOP. Donald Trump, real estate tycoon Trump, the host of 'Celebrity Apprentice,' could self-fund an entire campaign without spending a life-changing portion of his net worth. He has loudly criticized President Obama and claims he can negotiate with foreign governments better than anyone else.

Mark Warner, Virginia senator Warner is a former Virginia governor who won a tough Senate race in a battleground state. He's also known as a tough budget negotiator. Elizabeth Warren, Massachusetts senator Warren is a populist liberal who could give Hillary Clinton headaches by challenging her from the left, but she has said she has no plans to run and is happy in the U.S. Senate. Jim Webb, former Virginia senator Webb is a centrist Democrat and a Reagan-appointed former Navy Secretary who's hawkish on defense policy. He has launched a presidential exploratory committee.