MUSKEGON COUNTY, MI – Mercy Health Muskegon president Greg Loomis has come a long way since he began working in the Hackley Hospital storeroom as a teenager.

His interim position as the leader of Muskegon County’s largest employer and sole health care system became permanent on Jan. 1. Loomis had spent the last 13 months fulfilling the role, while also carrying out chief operating officer duties.

The veteran executive said he will focus on delivering primary and specialty care and ensuring the hospital system formerly known as Mercy Health Partners is providing affordable, accessible and high-quality care to residents.

As president, Loomis will continue carrying out the policies of the hospital, interacting with its trustees board and working closely with medical staff, including the senior leadership team.

Here are five more things to know about Loomis and his vision for Mercy Health Muskegon:

‘Bug for Healthcare’

Loomis launched his career in health care at 17 after securing a job at Hackley Hospital.

“I really did get the bug for healthcare back then,” said Loomis, who unloaded trucks and delivered medical supplies. “I really appreciated the work and the environment of working in the hospital.”

He recalls a supervisor telling him everything he did would have an impact on the facility’s patients and that has stayed with him through the decades, he said.



“What we do matters to the community — they are coming in for serious matters,” Loomis said. “It’s about what hospitals and their staffs provide to the patients that is important to me.”

Loomis briefly left Hackley for the Navy, where he worked as a hospital corpsman for four years. He returned to Hackley and enrolled in a business program at Grand Valley State University, where he later earned his MBA. Loomis went on to work at Muskegon General Hospital, where he secured his first leadership position as the facility’s admitting supervisor.

‘A Time for Change’

Loomis said the biggest challenge facing Mercy Health Muskegon will be adapting to health care reform — and that does not just encompass the changes that come with the Affordable Care Act, he said.

Health care providers are now being reimbursed on the quality of service, patient satisfaction and efficiency rather than volume, Loomis said.

In 2012, Loomis said Mercy Health Muskegon’s inpatient admissions had declined by 14 percent since fiscal year 2009 and that patients occupied less than half of its hospital beds.

Loomis said the declining admission rates will continue, while patients will begin to seek primary care services more frequently. The trend has triggered a new outlook on how the hospital uses its facilities and has led to the consolidation planned for its Mercy Campus, 1500 E. Sherman Blvd, he said.

The first phase of the project will cost $97 million and will relocate operating rooms from the hospital’s Hackley Campus, 1700 Clinton St.

“This really is a time of change certainly for all of health care,” Loomis said. “We still have a foot in the past, but very quickly we’re being assessed on the quality of service and other areas.”

‘High Quality Health Care’

Loomis said Mercy Health Muskegon will continue to take several measures to gauge and ensure patients have access to high quality health care, which is one of its “five strategic pillars.”

That includes regular meetings among the hospital’s board quality committee members and a “very active” patient safety committee led by the chief nursing officer, Loomis said.

Mercy Health Muskegon officials also look at its readmission rate, which many health care advocates contend make hospitals more accountable for what happens once patients return home.

Loomis described the hospital’s readmission rates as “great,” which was supported by a recent Becker's Hospital Review ranking that recognized Mercy Health Muskegon as the No. 1 hospital with low readmission rates for heart attack patients.



The rates calculate the percentage of inpatient discharges in which patients sought re-hospitalization. Under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals with high readmission rates lose a portion of Medicare reimbursement monies.

Helping Staff Help Patients

Loomis said the hospital will continue to recruit talent to the region and make sure its staff has access to the technology and personnel support they need to perform more efficiently.

“We’re aggressively trying to make sure we have the positions in Muskegon filled,” Loomis said.

Hospital leadership efforts to help doctors include recruiting supporting staff such as social workers, nurses, physician assistants and medical practitioners, he said.

Loomis said doctors can better handle their workloads if others are around to handle phone calls and other day-to-day occurrences.

Loomis also said the Muskegon operation will work more closely with its CHE Trinity affiliate Mercy Health Saint Mary’s in Grand Rapids.

In response to a past resident concern about overworked nurses and how nurses and doctors collaborate, Loomis said the relationship between the two groups has improved over the years.

“Our nursing leadership and our medical staff leadership over the past few years have really taken that on and have been collaborative. We measure nurse and physician relationships, and continue to improve in that regard,” Loomis said. “I don’t know if our nurses are overwhelmed. Everyone is going through a lot of change right now and that may cause some stress.”

‘Process Excellence’

Loomis said the hospital has borrowed a philosophy from Toyota and other automotive industry companies by creating a department solely focused on “lean.”

Also called “lean production” or “lean enterprise,” the philosophy focuses on efficiency and “driving waste out of the hospital system,” Loomis said.

Mercy Health created a Process Excellence Department in fall 2012 and it is led by an individual who has been directing the effort for about a year, Loomis said.

Loomis said the implementation of the lean philosophy means the hospital will serve patients with the facilities and resources the hospital already has. It will affect the design of the Mercy Health facilities, he said.

“My main goal is to make sure things get better and better as we go into the future,” Loomis said.

Mercy Health Muskegon spokeswoman Joan Kessler said Loomis will continue to act as COO until officials make a decision regarding the position.