The San Bernardino shooting that occurred earlier this month was horrific. Two radical Muslim shooters, Syed Farook and Tashfeen Malik, took the lives of 14 people and wounded more than 20 in what is increasingly looking like a terrorist attack. The media’s reaction to the shooting was equally horrendous. On the day of the attack, the LA Times editorial board said our infatuation with guns borders on suicidal impulses. This is before we knew anything.

Yet, the media’s reaction to those offering prayers to the victims and their families bordered on perversion; for heaven’s sake those who survived the attack gathered outside the Inland Regional Center in San Bernardino and prayed. A daughter who worked inside the building texted her father and asked him to say a prayer for her and her co-workers.

In an intense new video from NRA News, The Blaze’s Dana Loesch ripped into the “godless left” for their mockery of prayer, their penchant to “purge the facts” when it doesn’t meet their narrative, and their unconstitutional assault on the Second Amendment.

“This was a coordinated assault on the two freedoms they hate the most; our right to believe and our right to survive,” says Loesch. Speaking of the elites in the media, politics, and on college campuses, “they openly attack sacred American values and the people who cherish them with ruthlessness, and contempt, and downright hatred.” Loesch then described their one agenda as one fueled by “unholy arrogance.”

As Guy and Mary Katharine wrote in End of Discussion, Loesch noted that the far left “advances its power by any means necessary, namely shaming and silencing any dissent.” Why? If we don’t have these discussions and debates, they’re not at risk of losing them. By default, they win if we stifle honest debate about the threats posed by radical Islam and the endless political window dressing called gun control. Case in point: Last week, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest couldn’t name one mass shooting that would have been prevented by Obama’s gun control proposals to The Wall Street Journal’s Byron Tau.

During the campaign against prayer, the major news networks were of course praising the NY Daily News headline saying, “God isn’t fixing this,” concerning the San Bernardino shooting. The Media Research Center’s Newsbusters division was on the case, noting that CBS’ Gayle King said, “ I think the headline’s very powerful.” Weatherman Al Roker chimed in saying, “while that’s good intentions [offering prayers], thoughts and prayers aren’t getting – this isn't fixing this problem.” The only network not to get in on marginalizing prayer was ABC News’ Robin Roberts, who said offering prayers helps the families of the victims:

I talked to some family members that we'll share in the next hour and they – when we say we're thinking of them, the thoughts and prayers, it really helps them. They really feel the nation, the country, the world sympathizing with them and that we haven't and we can't become desensitized. We can't become and say this is a new normal.

NBC’s Andrea Mitchell was no different than her colleagues, touting gun control talking points and going after the National Rifle Association.

As Ben Shapiro has said often, the left thinks institutionally, the right thinks individually, which often places conservatives at a disadvantage regarding combating media narratives. Loesch illustrates this organization by noting how the liberal media have circled the wagons around Clinton who tried to blame the Benghazi attack on a video, instead of on a coordinated attack by terrorists; how they pervasively ignore current gun laws when reporting on the issue; and how they bury the monumental problems plaguing Obamacare. When the weatherman is in on prayer marginalization, you know you’re dealing with a determined opponent.