NEWARK, N.J. — Louis Vasquez made the right decision.

When the former San Diego Chargers guard became a free agent last year, he had plenty of suitors. But he wasn’t looking only for more money. He wanted to play for a winner too.

The Broncos signed the 335-pound lineman early in free agency because they figured he would help protect quarterback Peyton Manning and open lanes for their running backs. Denver gave Vasquez a four-year contract worth $23.5 million.

He responded with an all-pro season and helped the Broncos (15-3) advance to their first Super Bowl in 15 years.

Vasquez, with his Mexican-American heritage, was a big hit with Spanish-speaking reporters who attended Super Bowl media day.

Q: Why did you choose the Broncos?

A: I just was looking for where the team was headed, what kind of chemistry we’d have throughout the team, and overall where the location was. It was a no-brainer for me. Going from San Diego to Colorado, it’s a big difference, but (it’s) two different beauties, I’d say. You have the mountains and the landscape in Colorado, and the beaches in San Diego. For me it’s just a different beauty, and I’ve been loving it ever since.

Q: What’s your relationship like with center Manny Ramirez? You seem tight.

A: We call each other brothers. We played with each other two years at Texas Tech. Once I got here, he was one of the first teammates I called. I was like, “Hey, we’re teammates again.” We kind of picked back up where we left off in college, and he made my transition that much easier from San Diego to Denver.

Q: You’re in the Super Bowl now. That must be kind of surreal.

A: It is. Just waking up every morning and telling myself, “Hey, we’re here.” We haven’t accomplished what we want to accomplish just yet, but just to know that this is Super Bowl week, and we’re actually playing in it, has been one of the most surreal things that I’ve had to deal with.

Q: Your Mexican-American heritage seems very important to you. Is that accurate?

A: It’s everything for me and Manny as well. To have everybody like you watching this Sunday, it’s an amazing feeling.

Q: What does it mean to be representing the Latino community in the Super Bowl?

A: I actually spoke with Manny about it. It can be overwhelming, but we’re taking it for what it is, and it’s awesome to know that we have such a large group, especially the youth out there watching us. Hopefully it opens their eyes to say anything is possible, no matter what it is.

Q: How are you dealing with this week? Keeping your focus on the big game?

A: Just trying to keep my emotions in check. There’s a lot going on, this being Super Bowl week and all. Being in the biggest city in America already, and the Super Bowl being here, there’s so much going on. Just to mentally keep yourself focused on the goal you have at hand. That’s probably my biggest challenge right now, just keeping everything in order, everything small-focused, and preparing for the ultimate game.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

About Vasquez

2001-04: Considered one of the best offensive linemen in Texas while attending Corsicana High School.

2005-2008: Vasquez was a four-year letterman at Texas Tech, where he started 34-of-39 career games and received all-Big 12 Conference recognition after his final three seasons.

2009: Selected by the Chargers in the third round (78th overall) of the NFL draft. Vasquez started in 14 games for San Diego while helping the Chargers win their fourth consecutive AFC West Division title.

2010: Started only 10 games for San Diego, missing time because of knee and neck injuries.

2011: Vasquez started in 14 games, helping a San Diego team that ranked sixth in the NFL in total offense.

2012: Was the only offensive lineman in the NFL to start every game, commit no penalties and allow three or fewer sacks (2½).

2013: Signed by the Broncos as an unrestricted free agent. Vasquez started all 16 regular-season games, allowed no sacks and was named to his first Pro Bowl. He was the only player to participate in 100 percent of the Broncos’ offensive or defensive snaps.