As Congress knows well, when it comes to America’s domestic counterterrorism activities, getting it right is a matter of survival. As it is often said, law enforcement forces charged with protecting the public from terrorists must succeed all of the time, by comparison, terrorists need succeed only once. With that in mind, after the September 11 terrorist attacks, a new homeland security apparatus was born from the crisis with the best of intentions.

Yet despite those well-meaning goals, today, law enforcement individuals located outside of Washington, working to gather, share, and analyze information and intelligence are trapped in a fragmented, inefficient, and costly system and burdened by a rigid siloed structure.

ADVERTISEMENT

Two competing government structures — the U.S. Department of Justice’s (DOJ) Joint Terrorism Task Forces (JTTFs) and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s (DHS) fusion centers — currently compete for finite resources and forces. Already understaffed and under-budgeted, state and local law enforcement agencies have to make difficult choices in allocating resources (personnel and money) to these duplicative federal initiatives. Justice’s JTTFs pre-date the Homeland Security’s fusion centers.

JTTFs are “small cells of highly trained, locally based, passionately committed investigators, analysts, linguists, SWAT experts, and other specialists from dozens of U.S. law enforcement and intelligence agencies.” There are over 100 JTTFs around the United States, with more than 5,000 members from federal, state, and local law enforcement. While active, JTTFs are not perfect because the FBI’s culture — that only they have the proper experience to handle terrorism cases — inhibits sharing intelligence with local and other law enforcement. As a result, investigations are often federalized by the agency. Federalizing leads and cutting out local law enforcement can undermine years of community policing efforts.

Fusion centers came to be with the creation of the Department of Homeland Security and its control of homeland security grants. Seventy-eight fusion centers were developed in states and localities tied to DHS. While these centers do similar work as the JTTFs, they have far less capabilities. The estimated cost to create and maintain fusion centers across the nation is as high as $1.4 billion.

Beyond duplicative efforts, unlike JTTFs, fusion centers haven’t shown much intelligence value. An in-depth U.S. Senate investigation noted fusion centers “often produced irrelevant, useless or inappropriate intelligence reporting to DHS, and many produced no intelligence reporting whatsoever.” In fact, the investigation could not find a single instance where a fusion center “uncovered a terrorist threat, nor could it identify a contribution such fusion center reporting made to disrupt an active terrorist plot.”

In many cases, the fusion centers merely reproduced information and intelligence already disseminated by the FBI. Despite DHS’s assertions to the contrary, the investigators were “unable to confirm that the fusion centers contributions were as significant as DHS portrayed them; were unique to the intelligence and analytical work expected of fusion centers; or would not have occurred absent a fusion center.”

There is another issue to consider. With siloed entities tied to two different federal departments, there is a risk of inadvertently failing to share information or intelligence that could help prevent a terrorist attack. The de facto wall between intelligence and investigation information which had been established by a now infamous 1995 memorandum written by Assistant Attorney General Jamie Gorelick, and eliminated after the September 11 attack should not be rebuilt. This higher wall than required contributed to the intelligence failures leading up to the September 11 attack.

The lesson we should have learned from this tragic episode is that we can ill afford for key information or intelligence to reside in different repositories, thereby increasing the risk it won’t get combined with other information or intelligence to give our law enforcement personnel the fullest picture possible. Going forward, the FBI should develop the Joint Terrorism Task Forces into truly joint ventures where local law enforcement officials sit as equal partners with their federal counterparts.

As we’ve seen over the last fifteen years, the job of counterterrorism entities is a difficult one. Federal, state, and local law enforcement officials already spend a good bit of time to keep us safe. Sharing information and intelligence poses another large challenge. The rise of Daesh/ISIS and its emphasis on lone wolf and small group attacks makes our current siloed domestic intelligence system inherently more dangerous, inefficient, and costly. It would be helpful if Congress could initiate the merging of the fusion centers into the older, more established and active Joint Terrorism Task Forces. Bringing all the key players together under one roof should increase cooperation, lower costs, reduce inefficiency, and enhance effectiveness.

Most importantly, it also should help us detect and stop terrorist attacks.

Mayer is a visiting fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. He previously served in senior positions at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.