Photo

Farro’s role in this gazpacho of sorts (without the traditional bread thickener), is that of a garnish. It contributes texture and substance to the light summer soup. I spoon about 1/4 cup of the cooked wheat berries into each bowl and also add diced cucumber. The farro sinks, the cucumber floats. When you get to the bottom of the bowl, you’ll find some lingering grains of farro enrobed in the delicious, tangy soup.

Time: 10 minutes, and 1 to 2 hours chilling

1 long European or Japanese cucumber

1 1/2 pounds ripe tomatoes, quartered

2 slices red onion, soaked for 5 minutes in cold water, drained and rinsed

2 large garlic cloves, halved, green germs removed

2 tablespoons sherry vinegar

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil

Salt to taste

1/4 cup broth from the farro (optional)

2 to 4 ice cubes (optional)

1 cup cooked farro or spelt (see below)

Slivered fresh basil leaves or very small whole basil leaves and additional olive oil if desired for garnish

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

1. Cut cucumber into 2 equal pieces. Peel and roughly chop one piece, and cut the other piece into 1/4-inch dice, for garnish.

2. Working in 2 batches, blend roughly chopped cucumber, tomatoes, onion, garlic, vinegar, olive oil, salt, farro broth and ice cubes (if using) in a blender for 2 minutes or longer, until smooth and frothy. Taste and adjust salt. Transfer to a bowl or container (a metal bowl is the most efficient for chilling) and chill for 1 to 2 hours.

3. Place about 1/4 cup cooked farro (or spelt) in each soup bowl. Ladle in the soup. Garnish with diced cucumber and basil. Drizzle on olive oil if desired and serve.

Yield: Serves 4

Advance preparation: You can serve the soup the day after you make it. Cooked farro and spelt will keep for 3 days in the refrigerator and freeze well.

To cook farro or spelt, soak 1 part farro with 3 parts water for 1 hour or longer. Bring to a boil, add salt to taste, reduce the heat, cover and simmer 50 minutes, or until the grains begin to splay. Some brands of farro are softer than others and yield a softer, starchier grain. 1 cup raw farro yields 3 cups cooked.

Nutritional information per serving: 170 calories; 7 grams fat; 1 gram saturated fat; 1 gram polyunsaturated fat; 5 grams monounsaturated fat; 0 milligrams cholesterol; 22 grams carbohydrates; 4 grams dietary fiber; 22 milligrams sodium (does not include salt to taste); 5 grams protein