Longtime employee of machine shop with no medical training has been genius behind turning visions into realities.

In a Dec. 18, 2013 photo, Juan Fernandez, the machinist at Houston's Methodist Hospital, holds the first prototype for Dr. Michael DeBakey's left ventricular assist device, which he helped DeBakey develop, in his machine shop at Methodist, in Houston. (Photo: Karen Warren, Ap) Story Highlights Juan Fernandez has created everything from microscope slide holders to prototypes for cardivascular devices

He began his career in 1985 at the Baylor College of Medicine, where he ran the machine shop

Most recently, Fernandez has been focusing on components for a heartbeat simulator

HOUSTON (AP) — On the second level of a parking garage at Houston Methodist Hospital, behind an inconspicuous door, sits a workshop of aging machines that have helped make significant contributions in the field of cardiovascular medicine.

And at the heart of this workshop is a modest man, the hospital machinist, Juan Fernandez.

He spends his days in the former storage facility measuring, drilling and carving out tools that help mend failing hearts, heal broken limbs and foster scientific discoveries.

While Fernandez has no medical expertise or formal education in engineering, he has worked in the Texas Medical Center for more than 25 years, building tools for physicians and researchers, turning their visions into realities.

Working with various materials from plastics to metals, Fernandez has created everything from microscope slide holders and surgical instruments to prototypes for cardiovascular devices. In the 1990s, he helped world-renowned heart surgeon Dr. Michael DeBakey create a prototype for the left ventricular assist device, known as the LVAD, a blood flow pump that has saved the lives of countless heart patients awaiting transplants.

"He's helped advance science and medicine in the Texas Medical Center," Stephen Igo, director of the Entrepreneurial Institute for the Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center, told the Houston Chronicle (http://bit.ly/K9HFfH). "There's no doubt about it."

Fernandez, 65, began his career in the medical center in 1985 at the Baylor College of Medicine, where he ran the machine shop. However, in October 2010, due to budget cuts, Baylor closed the machine shop, leaving Fernandez without a job.

Igo, who has worked with Fernandez for about 20 years, jumped on the opportunity to bring him to Methodist, which purchased all of his old machines from Baylor and provided the new shop for him in 2011.

"He's absolutely a resource," Igo said. "People will show up with drawings on napkins, envelopes or a piece of paper and he'll turn into a finished product."

Born in Mexico, Fernandez and his family moved to Houston when he was 7. His first brush with machines came in high school when he took a vocational welding class.

After graduating in 1968, one of his older brothers, a tool grinder, got him work with a company that made parts and tools for oil rigs. Soon he was learning to use lathes and mills, making valves and drill bits for rigs.

He spent a short time with the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve, returning home by 1971 to work at the machining company. He also wed his junior high sweetheart. The couple, now 43 years strong, share two daughters and a son.

After more than 15 years making parts for oil rigs, his company relocated, leaving him searching for other jobs. He ran across a newspaper job listing from Baylor for a machinist.

"Why would Baylor need a machinist? " he remembered thinking. Three months later, he started the job.

While he has built tools for various physicians from pediatricians to plastic surgeons, Fernandez said his most important work has been done in the cardiovascular field.

In 1991, Fernandez began working with DeBakey and his team on the left ventricular assist device. Designed to assist with the function of a failing heart, the LVAD, now owned by Micromed, was part of a number of heart assist devices that made an impact in the cardiovascular field, creating both a bridge to transplantation for patients as well permanent implants.

For six years, Fernandez said he worked on the model, designed by DeBakey and NASA engineers. There were 15 to 16 models of the LVAD before the final version was ready to be manufactured. He still has the first prototype.

"They were going to throw it away and I said 'I'll keep it,' " he said.

The project was especially important to him. Only a few years after immigrating to the United States, Fernandez's father suddenly died at 52 from heart failure.

Often while he worked on the LVAD, Fernandez thought about the huge advancements made in cardiovascular medicine that might have saved his father's life.

"I guess you could say I was doing it for him, too," Fernandez said. "He's gone, but hopefully it could save someone else's father."

Most recently, Fernandez has spent much of his time at Methodist working on building components for a heartbeat simulator used in the hospital's Cardiovascular Hemodynamics Imaging Lab.

The simulator is a model of the cardiovascular system, designed to allow physicians and researchers to study the blood flow through heart valves. They are able to use the simulator to test the accuracy of clinical imaging techniques such as ultrasounds and MRIs.

Fernandez not only built the mock heart chamber, but most of the parts that help the simulator operate.

Dr. Stephen Little, cardiologist and director of Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center's Valve Clinic, said the first version of the mock chamber began with a peanut butter jar.

Methodist researchers have used the device to conduct and publish studies on blood flow in the heart that can help physicians make better clinical decisions, Little said. He stressed that to have someone with Fernandez's expertise and craftsmanship is invaluable.

"I'm a 70 to 80 percent full-time clinician and I don't have the ability to make this stuff," he said. "These kinds of projects would never happen if we didn't access to someone who could simply say 'Yeah, no problem, I'll take a chunk of plastic and make into a heart for you.' "

Some days are busy and others are slow at the machine shop. On a mid-December day, Fernandez carefully worked on his milling machine, creating a plastic wedge slide for a researcher studying sensory pathways in the brain. The wedge would be used so researchers could cut brain slices at precise angles.

Fernandez said he doesn't always ask much about how every tool or instrument he creates will be used in the future.

"I just make sure it's made right," he said.

No matter how big or small the job, Fernandez said he always makes sure the finished product is of the highest quality and precisely what the physician asked for.

"It makes me feel like I contributed in some way to mankind," he said. "Not in a huge way, but I had some part in it."

A piece of plastic machined by Juan Fernandez, which is used for the heartbeat simulators also built by machinist Fernandez at Methodist, Dec. 18, 2013, in Houston. (Photo: Karen Warren, AP)

Copyright 2014 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1jdnFbs