New Yorkers have condemned Donald Trump for proposing to bar Muslims from the U.S., making anti-Semitic jokes, and calling Mexicans rapists and murderers. But that doesn’t mean his incendiary campaign for the presidency has hurt his business here, where the Trump name is on apartment towers, golf courses and even public skating rinks.

Although the terms of Trump’s agreements are mostly secret, it’s likely that only a felony conviction would allow a condo association or licensee to take his name off a building.

“First of all, you need to have a majority of condo owners in a building say, ‘I want to try to break the branding contract,’ ” said Robert Ivanhoe, an attorney with Greenberg Traurig. “If Trump has 30 years on his contract, you’d have to pay him what he would earn in 30 years.”

Though Mayor Bill de Blasio last week called Trump “dangerous” and a “demagogue,” he is powerless to take Trump’s name off the two skating rinks, the Central Park carousel and the Bronx golf course that he manages for the city. “In August, we reviewed the city’s existing contracts with Donald Trump and found no legal way to cancel these contracts,” said a de Blasio spokeswoman.

While condo boards have the ability to hire and fire management companies, it is telling that the Trump Organization has stayed on at many of the buildings it has constructed, including Trump World Tower at U.N. Plaza. “Trump buildings are extremely well managed,” said Leonard Steinberg, president at residential brokerage Compass. “Like it or not, he does a good job.”

Because of that following, Steinberg and others believe Trump’s antics on the political stage will have little impact on the value of his properties in New York City.

“These buildings that bear his name will continue to be valued based on the state of the market—not his personality,” said Louise Phillips Forbes, a residential broker at Halstead Property Management.

Jump-starting 2 WTC

Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox and News Corp. will get a rent break at Larry Silverstein’s 2 World Trade Center, thanks to $9 million in subsidies from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. The public funds are supposed to speed construction of the tower, ensuring Murdoch’s media empire makes the move and unlocking $600 million for transportation spending, the Port Authority said.

Protecting wages

A judge upheld a state rule requiring nail salons to buy bonds to ensure workers get paid any back wages due.

A Fifth Season

Pepsi challenged? The Mets made it to the World Series this past season, but that wasn’t enough for Pepsi—Citi Field’s marquee sponsor since the stadium opened in 2009. The soda company didn’t renew its deal with the team, and the red Pepsi sign towering over the second deck in right field will be removed. Rival Coca-Cola has been in discussions to join the Mets roster.



Seagram Building owner Aby Rosen hopes to raise $30 million for an eatery to replace the fabled Philip Johnson-designed Four Seasons restaurant in the iconic Park Avenue office tower. Rosen says he’s looking for as many as 100 investors, pledging a 120% return before partners take any proceeds and a 40% cut of future profits.

Vino in one hour

Amazon has added booze to its $7.99 one-hour delivery service in Manhattan, as food-delivery wars heat up during the holiday season. Amazon also promises 60-minute delivery from Mario Batali’s Italian-food emporium, Eataly.

Obamacare push

The White House has tasked New York-based health care startups ZocDoc and Oscar with coaxing the nation’s uninsured to get coverage for 2016. Oscar created a two-minute video starring its ubiquitous cartoon characters explaining insurance concepts.

Mickey invests in Vice

Disney invested an additional $200 million in Brooklyn’s Vice Media to help finance original programming for Vice’s new cable channel, set to launch in February. Disney now owns a 10% stake.

Cash flush

Two NYPD officers from Flushing’s 109th Precinct were arrested on bribery charges for allegedly taking payoffs from local karaoke bar owners to ignore drug use and other violations at the venues.

Data point

New York City finished ninth out of 10 state regions in Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s annual economic-development grant contest, with $84.1 million awarded to 92 projects.

Get Crain's Real Estate Daily (RED) Alert Sign up for our FREE daily Real Estate Alert email newsletter. The day's top commercial real estate news, transactions and executive moves. More Newsletters ›

Comments