TOP STORIES

Is Michael Pearson done? Is it over for him? A lengthy takeout in the Wall Street Journal with a passive-aggressive headline is never a good sign. Is it now just too much for him to overcome? “We are being attacked by everyone. We have few friends to defend ourselves,” said Theo Melas-Kyriazi, a Valeant director since 2005. – Wall Street Journal

And now Valeant may be punting on its specialty contact lens manufacturing division, Paragon Vision Sciences. Is it connected to Federal Trade Commission review of its control of the market? – Reuters

LIFE SCIENCES

Lots of Google-in-healthcare talk this week. Here’s one you may have missed: Google Ventures is folding its European and U.S. funds together into a “global fund.” – Tech.eu

ASLAN Pharmceuticals, the Singapore-based biotech fighting tumors more prevalent in Asia, raised $34 million. – The Business Times

TherapeuticsMD hit its goals in its late-stage study for its drug treating vaginal pain (stock soared). – Reuters

CRISPR to the rescue against malaria? – Wall Street Journal

PAYERS PROVIDERS

A hospital redesign with patients truly in mind: “We attribute much of our success to making patients and frontline health care professionals the true architects of the project.” – Harvard Business Review

Is there anything we can glean from Independence Blue Cross’ employee assistance program, Personal Life Management? – Philadelphia Business Journal

TECHNOLOGY

A refreshing look at how the chief health information officer operates. – Healthcare IT News

Rock Health’s Top 50 in Digital Health is out. – Rock Health

POLITICS

The first negative Obamacare news that may carry real traction:a new report says healthcare reform will cost the workforce 2 million jobs. – The Hill

I get the feeling that antibiotic use is jockeying to be healthcare’s version of a global climate-change debate. – Reuters

The future of the Cadillac tax is still up in the air. – The Hill

A LITTLE BIT EXTRA

Now that you’d want to, but just in case: here’s an app that can block Donald Trump from your iPhone.