General Electric retirees who have filed a lawsuit against the company seeking to stop it from dropping health insurance benefits for while-collar retirees are hopeful that the judge overseeing the case will rule by Jan. 1 when the benefits will cease to exist.

“We’re still hopeful,” said Evelyn Kauffman, a 64-year-old GE retiree who lives in Niskayuna. “There are so many people that are adversely effected.”

Kauffman is one of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit filed in federal court in Wisconsin. The suit seeks an injunction against GE, a judge’s order to halt GE’s plans to end the health benefits Jan. 1.

GE has been arguing that it never promised that the benefit plans would last forever and that stopping the clock will do more harm than good.

GE is moving roughly 65,000 retirees to a health exchange called OneExchange that offers thousands of different plans from private insurers. The company had previously offered Medicare gap plans that covered different parts of Medicare coverage, and will now offer 65-and older retirees a $1,000 subsidy instead toward the Medicare gap options offered by OneExchange.

The GE plans provide “gap” coverage of Medicare, which is the health insurance plan that covers most Americans after they turn 65.

GE argued in a court filing made Friday that an injunction against the move could harm the 54,000 retirees who have already switched over to the OneExchange plans.

Back in 2012, GE canceled the Medicare plans for GE retirees who had not yet reached 65. The latest move to cancel the coverage altogether on Jan. 1 happened earlier this year.

Reached at home Tuesday, Kauffman said that she was a benefits counselor at GE, and she remembers explaining to people as they retired from the company that they could count of the Medicare plans.

She now feels the burden of GE going back on its word. She has gotten calls from retirees from all over the world from GE retirees.

GE estimates that the average retiree is currently paying about $3,608 annually through the GE plans, and that 78 percent of the retirees who switch will pay the same or less than they paid through GE. Of the 22 percent who will pay more, GE says 60 percent of those will only see an increase of $500 a year.

GE says it is canceling the plans because of the cost to shareholders, current employees and other factors, although it said that changes to the Medicare marketplace has created plans that are cheaper than the GE plans.

Kauffman says she’s taken up the cause because she used to travel the country explaining their post-retirement benefits.

“I’ll be able to buy coverage,” Kauffman said. “It’s not a big deal for me. But GE doesn’t need to do this.”

GE said in a recent regulatory filing that the move saves it $586 million in future obligations.

Kauffman says it will be a lot more difficult for GE to restore the Medicare plans after the Jan. 1 deadline, which is why she is hopeful that a temporary injunction will come before then.

GE did not immediately respond to a request for comment.