Shari Jenkins Schmit displays some of the cards in her collection for her business, The Bookmark Card, which she recently sold to Leanin’ Tree, a Boulder, Colorado-based greeting card company. (Photo: Courtesy photo )

Montana entrepreneur sells her card business to Leanin' Tree

A Montana entrepreneur who started a card company to create her own job sold her business to Boulder, Colorado-based Leanin' Tree, a greeting-card business.

Shari Jenkins Schmit launched The Bookmark Card Co. with her collage designs after moving to Butte several years ago when her husband was transferred there with NorthWestern Energy.

"The recession had hit and for the first time in my life, I couldn't find a job," she said. "I had taken a Photoshop class when I lived in Great Falls, so I started creating."

She created collage work, scouring antique stores for old images and starting scanning.

Shari Jenkins Schmit created this design for the greeting card company she recently sold to Leanin’Tree after she and her husband Mike bought the Collins Mansion in Great Falls. (Photo: Courtesy photo )

"I also scanned in buttons, foliage, barbed wire," she said. "My scanner has seen it all."

She created designs with women and humor as inspiration.

"I am very much inspired by trying to look at life from a humorous point of view," she said. "I think it is important we not take ourselves too seriously. And laughter is so good for the soul."

Shari Jenkins Schmit recently sold her greeting card company to Leanin’Tree, a Colorado-based greeting card company. Leanin’ Tree will use her collage art for greeting cards, mugs and other items. (Photo: Courtesy photo )

And since women buy 94 percent of the greeting cards in the U.S., they were a great target market for her products.

"My topics are things such as aging, girlfriends and chocolate," she said.

Her products were sized to be reused as bookmarks and were sold in 500 stores across the U.S.

A representative from Leanin' Tree picked up some at an airport and contacted Schmit. After meeting with the company, she decided to sell her business and will continue to do some designs.

Part of her decision to sell is so that she can focus on her new project. Her husband Mike recently was transferred back to Great Falls and the couple bought The Collins Mansion.

Years of operation as a bed and breakfast left the historic home in need of some restoration.

"Our goal is to open the home up for public tours in two years, which will be the 125th anniversary of when the mansion was built," Schmit said.

Great Falls native hired as director of Small Business Development Center

Jason Nitchke is the new director of the Small Business Development Center, which is hosted by the Great Falls Development Authority. He replaces Rebecca Engum, who will take on a new role recruiting manufacturing businesses to the area.

Nitschke and his wife, Andrea Fisher-Nitschke, worked in the Great Falls television industry for several years before moving to St. Louis in 2011.

Jason Nitschke is returning to Great Falls with his wife Andrea and daughter Logan to be the director of the Small Business Development Center. (Photo: Courtesy photo )

"We moved there to be closer to my wife's family, who then retired and moved to Florida," said Jason Nitschke.

The couple, who now have a 1-year-old daughter Logan, decided to try to relocate back to Great Falls, which is Nitschke's hometown.

GFDA President Brett Doney said Nitchke's strong marketing skills will be an asset to the local business-development organization.

In addition to experience as a TV sports anchor, Nitchke had a successful career as a freelance journalist in the Denver market, started a furniture restoration business in St. Louis and most recently worked for the Illinois insurance commissioner's office on the Affordable Care Act roll out.

He starts with GFDA on Oct. 13.

Sears opened in Great Falls eight decades ago

The announcement that Sears is closing its Great Falls store in mid-December came earlier this week.

Sears, Roebuck & Co. opened on the 400 block of Central Avenue in 1934. The multilevel department store was a downtown anchor and its move to the Holiday Village Mall in 1991 is still referred to as a distinct blow to commerce in the area.

Now 80, years later, the iconic retailer will no longer have a brick and mortar presence in the Electric City.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1sbfHFx