President Obama returned from a nine-day, round-the-world tour early this morning. But not before once again detailing for another foreign audience some of the numerous things wrong with his country.

“The United States has to have some humility,” said the aloof one, “because there have been times where we did the wrong thing. There have been times where we have problems in our own country. And so we will want to go tell other people what to do, but then back home we’re not always doing what we say we should do.”

Yes, he was unclear. But Obama had no teleprompter to feed him replies during that Malaysian town-hall with young people.

The Democrat who’s presided over the slowest economic recovery in 70 years told students that thanks to his leadership, the U.S. economy “has recovered faster than almost any other country” since 2008.

Obama said due to his legislative initiative, millions of Americans willing to pay soaring premiums now have access to healthcare; he called it the Affordable Care Act. Apparently Obama didn’t have time to go into the law’s widespread unpopularity, court challenges and collapsing finances.

Obama informed these future Asian leaders that his country has several major problems. “Number One, in the United States, there is a growing inequality that I think is a real problem,” said the man whose policies have produced ongoing wage stagnation, record numbers of Americans squeezed from the workforce and the greatest increase in economic inequality in decades.

Obama listed “pitfalls” to avoid in country-building. “I would say, Number One,” (Yes, yes, two Number Ones, but we told you he had no teleprompter), “it is very important to avoid any political system where money overwhelms ideas.”

“When politicians have to raise so much money all the time, then they

start listening a little bit more to the people who have money, as

opposed to ordinary people,” said the man who raised and spent more than a billion dollars of other people’s money — two times — to become president. And he’s still doing it, despite an inability to run again.

Obama also bemoaned the American political process, saying it’s become “so expensive and it lasts so long.” This from the impatient freshman senator who announced his first presidential candidacy fully 21 months before the election, compared to Bill Clinton’s 13 months and John F. Kennedy’s 11 months.

Also, “politics in the United States increasingly is defined by personal attacks and saying very sensational things in the media,” said the president who’s likened political opponents to Nazis and suggested Mitt Romney causes cancer.

Then there’s race, always on Obama’s mind. “Historically, in the United States, the issue of race has been very prominent…We’ve struggled with this for over 200 years, but it’s still an issue that comes up.”

Although Obama neglected to point out that those same Americans allegedly struggling so hard with race felt comfortable enough about that nagging old issue to elect him as the first black to hold the nation’s highest office in more than two centuries — two times.

Obama offered the young people two — no, three — more pieces of advice. First, leaders must learn to prioritize. In Obama’s case, for instance, the biggest national security threat clearly is global warming, not some ragtag army of terrorists.

Second, he said, a good leader must learn to delegate. That’s easier for him because, Obama claimed modestly, “I’m good at surrounding myself with really smart people.” For example, Joe Biden.

Obama’s third — and perhaps most important — bit of advice to young Asians was the constant need in life for tough self-evaluation.

“You have to be able to be honest in evaluating what’s worked and what doesn’t work, and make adjustments…. Sometimes you just have to realize, you know what, this path didn’t work. We’ve got to try something different. And so you have to be honest and constantly reevaluate and reassess what you’re doing. And be open, then, to new information and criticism.”

Like, say, al Qaeda being on the run. Giving away the farm in the Iran nuclear deal. ObamaCare being a huge success. And the war against ISIS going so well.

RELATED:

The incredible shrinking president

Thank you, President Obama, for all you’ve done to Democrats

A-10 combat pilot urges ‘coherent, aggressive’ anti-ISIS strategy