Students, schools expected to see decrease in test scores during first year of CMAS implementation.

PARCC States The Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers (PARCC) is a group of states working together to develop a set of assessments that measure whether students are on track to be successful in college and their careers. PARCC is made up of: Arkansas, Colorado, District of Columbia, Illinois, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio and Rhode Island. Information courtesy www.parcconline.org.

New state assessments have sparked much conversation and likely an equal amount of controversy among parents, school district and legislators across Colorado and the nation.

The Colorado Measures of Academic Success, or CMAS, measures new learning expectations outlined in the Colorado Academic Standards that were implemented in 2009. Common Core standards for English and math were embedded in 2012. Nick Carochi, director of student services for the Cañon City School District, said CMAS replaces the former CSAP and TCAP tests that measured expectations according to 20-year-old standards.

Carochi said he believes the people who are against assessments and the new standards are beginning to understand the schools and districts are applying state law.

"Whether it's the assessments, teacher evaluations, the new standards that have been in place since 2009 — we're just implementing state law, we don't have choices," he said. "This is what we have — we have to do these assessments."

Advertisement

Colorado Statute 22-7409 states all students are required to take state assessments, but Carochi said there is no penalty if they don't. Schools don't provide alternative activities or work during testing times.

Parents who refuse to have their students take state assessments are strongly encouraged to complete a face-to-face interview with the school's principal and submit a letter of refusal. Parents also are encouraged to meet with Carochi who documents these cases to the state. He said parents won't be persuaded to allow their students to take the tests, but he does need to track refusals and the reasons why. The district typically has had two or three refusals each year, he said, but there only has been one in the last two school years.

"Parents can write a letter of refusal, and break the law, but the schools are the ones being punished, because the schools get docked," Carochi said. "This is an exception this year, but if we didn't have 95 percent of our students testing, we'd get lowered a rating of our school performance."

A school that may be an improvement-rated school on its accreditation would be lowered to priority improvement level if there is less than 95 percent of participation in state testing, Carochi said. This also applies to the school district's accreditation.

The Colorado State Board of Education has requested a time-out on the rule this year because of the controversy over Common Core standards and the new assessments. Carochi said the state is expecting a big push back, and in some district's, it's extremely intense.

The level expected of students to be learning and the level of content are extremely high, Carochi said, but they match up with the new standards.

"It's going to take us two or three years to really understand this new bar that has been set of what is expected of students," he said. "There was a lot of talk about the new Common Core standards in English and math being too easy — or they're dumbing down — they're actually harder. They're more critical thinking and problem solving instead of just learning content."

Carochi said these new tests measure performance against higher expectations, and with those higher expectations, he said, fewer students initially will achieve at the highest levels.

"We know from other states who have implemented these tests, our results area going to drop dramatically," he said. "We're used to being at the state average, 70 percent proficient and advanced for reading, we're going to drop probably into either 20 or 30 percent."

He said the drop will be attributed to students learning how to take a new test, learning to maneuver and manipulate the computer and simply new standards and higher level of thinking standards.

The state's new mandate didn't come without a price tag. The district has spent $5,000 this year to purchase headphones and $60,000 for laptops for test use.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com