Topics: Cockroaches, elephants, Smithsonian.com, Innovation News, Life News

This article originally appeared on Smithsonian.com

We humans are social creatures. But we don’t just crave physical interaction to fill the world with people: A loving touch is important for helping infants properly develop and ensuring healthy romantic relationships, among other benefits. To quote Daft Punk and Paul Williams, “Touch, sweet touch / You’ve given me too much to feel / Sweet touch / You’ve almost convinced me I’m real.”

Animals also value touch. Primates groom one another to reinforce social bonds, while elephants gently caress upset friends to calm them. But it’s not only the most sentient members of the animal kingdom that are influenced by touch—so too are cockroaches.

According to new research published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B, touch plays a very important role in roach society: it hastens a female roach’s reproductive capabilities.

Cockroaches, of course, are a major pest species, so researchers already knew quite a bit about their reproduction. Females that have higher levels of juvenile hormones develop their eggs up to several days faster than those with lower hormonal levels. Females that live in large groups, likewise, produce eggs faster.

Connecting these dots, some studies have found that antenna touches from other roaches trigger hormonal production in females, speeding the cycle of egg production. But the mechanisms within touch that causes hormones to surge—whether something specific to living cockroaches themselves, or something about the physical feeling itself—remained unknown.

The authors of the new study, entomologists and engineers from North Carolina State University who are not prone to squeamishness, wondered what it would take to mimic the baby-making roach touch. Could artificial tactile stimulation also influence egg development?

The team set up a series of holding pens for German cockroaches (the ones that tend to infest houses). They selected females that had just molted into adulthood, and anesthetized them to remove some of their oocytes, or developing egg cells. No males were involved, as cockroach eggs begin to grow in the female prior to any acts of insect intimacy.

After collecting oocyte average sizes for all of the roaches, they put single females into each of the pens, and then exposed them to a number of different scenarios, including putting in another female, putting in a dead roach or leaving the females in isolation. In other cases, they permitted another roach to only peep its antenna into the cage rather than its entire body, or allowed a roach with severed antenna to stick its head in.

To see whether or not roach-free touches can stimulate reproduction, some of the females were also exposed to artificial antennas. These included downy duck feathers or feathers stripped of all down, the latter of which most closely resembled giant roach antenna. The feathers, which were connected to a motor, could rotate around the roach’s pen, allowing the researchers to tinker with the frequency of touch. After six days, the females’ oocytes were measured again, to see how much they’d grown since the beginning of the experiment.