Topics: Money, New York City, New York Times, power lunch, rich people, Wealth, Media News, Life News, News

In Woody Allen’s latest film, “Blue Jasmine,“ the wealthy supposedly get their comeuppance. It is the more mannered response to America’s recent economic collapse than, say, “The Dark Knight.” Jasmine is a woman of means and leisure but the façade of her life crumbles when her husband, Hal, a philandering financier running a Ponzi scheme, is revealed as a fraud. Jasmine, née Jeanette, is forced to move in with her working-class sister, Ginger, in San Francisco. High jinks ensue. It’s a good enough movie in that bland way of Woody Allen, which is to say “Blue Jasmine” is competent but largely uninspired. By the end of the movie, which is short but feels interminable, very little has happened and nothing much matters.

“Blue Jasmine” is very much one of those movies trying to make a subtle statement that ends up doing the opposite. While the film is supposed to be some kind of high-minded critique of excessive consumption and who pays the real price for the wealthy to remain wealthy, the movie falls desperately but unapologetically short of that ambition. Instead, there is an aspirational quality to the filming, with loving depictions of wealthy New York — homes in the Hamptons, the impeccably designed apartment in the city, Jasmine’s exquisite wardrobe, ladies lunching. Oh how wonderful it would be, the film suggests, if we could all have nice things.

This reminds me of one of my truly guilty pleasures: reading articles about rich people in the New York Times. I cannot get enough of the breathless, thinly veiled envy in so many of these articles written by journalists who are, like most of us, on the outside looking in at the wealthy as they breathe such rarefied air. What I particularly enjoy about these articles is the shamelessness. These people have money they have earned (or stolen, or inherited), and by god, they will enjoy that filthy lucre.

In his new book “Very Recent History: An Entirely Factual Account of a Year (c. AD 2009) in a Large City,” Choire Sicha writes, “Each person lived and moved and worked in his own thin particular slice, like a glass plate in a high, compressed stack. The happier, richer people, it was imagined, were up above in ever-thinner, ever-shinier glass plates … And below: thick slabs of the poorer, the lonelier, and the hopelessly left behind. Those were people who’d gambled maybe with actual money and lost, or who had never had anything to begin with.” Sicha’s entire book is a sober antidote to the fawning wealth journalism of the New York Times, but that description, in particular, reveals the uncomfortable truth about wealth in New York City. When they write about outrageous fortune, the Times allows the people mired in the thick slabs to look up at the people in the shinier glass plates and to see, with exacting detail, what they are missing.

Imagine the struggle of living in a 6,500-square-foot apartment but needing a room of one’s own for writing. The Times, as they say, is on it. Freddie Gershon, of the 6,500-square-foot apartment, “wanted a sanctuary that didn’t require me to get dressed and go outside. I wanted to go to the passenger or service elevator and just go to a different floor.” The perfect solution is undoubtedly a 1,000-square-foot apartment downstairs where he can tackle that novel he is finally ready to write.