Did you know that the nation's first "right-to-die" legislation was introduced in 1967, right here in Florida?

Its sponsor was Rep. Walter W. Sackett, a Miami medical doctor and colorful character who reportedly also advocated feeding bacon and eggs to infants and giving coffee to 6-month-olds. According to his 1985 obituary in the Orlando Sentinel, he "died in his sleep" at 79 — the way most of us would prefer to go.

In his Tallahassee days, Sackett kept re-introducing the right-to-die bill without success. But he did get to be present in 1984 when Gov. Bob Graham signed the Life-Prolonging Procedures Act — a loosely written law that raised more questions than it settled.

Today our state has a strong statute protecting patients' rights to refuse medical care, even though not many patients actually know about it. And both culturally and politically, it looks like we're a long way away from joining the five states where it's now legal to get medical help in ending your own life.

I found that tidbit of Florida history at the website of a national nonprofit that has a new chapter forming here in Sarasota. Before now, the only Florida chapter was in Clearwater.

Compassion & Choices was formed in 2005 by the merger of two right-to-die groups, one of them an offshoot of the pioneering Hemlock Society. The other Hemlock descendant is the Final Exit Network — a more activist organization that offers companionship and guidance to people seeking assistance in dying — which also has a Southwest Florida presence.

By contrast, Compassion & Choices concentrates less on the how-tos, and more on policy changes that would make it easier for people to die on their own terms without running afoul of the law.

Among its aims:

-- To "make aid in dying an open, legitimate option."

-- To give patients more control and "reduce unwanted interventions at the end of life."

-- To support legislation that ensures "full information and access to all end-of-life care options."

-- To "normalize accurate, unbiased language throughout the end-of-life choice discussion ('aid in dying' instead of 'assisted suicide')."

Winnie Downes of Sarasota is chairing the formation of the Sarasota chapter. A steering committee met this month to plot its course, and the first public event will be in early November: a talk by Barbara Mancini, an unintentional heroine of the right-to-die movement.

Mancini, a Philadelphia nurse, was charged with assisting her 93-year-old father's suicide after she handed him a bottle of morphine that had been left at his home by a hospice nurse. Compassion & Choices helped with her legal defense, and the case was dismissed in February 2014.

Compassion & Choices is also involved in a Florida case — a lawsuit by Sharon Hallada of Lakeland against a hospital and nursing home, claiming that they disregarded her mother's do-not-resuscitate order. That case is set for a jury trial in October.

In Sarasota, said Downes, the chapter will be "putting our emphasis on education and eventually on legislation. Legislation is someday, someday — hopefully in my lifetime."

Already she is armed with a list of some 500 people in Sarasota, Manatee and Charlotte counties who have made donations to the national organization.

"It's interesting that it means so much to so many people," Downes said.

Others who'd like to be on the mailing list of the new local chapter can email her at winniedownes@gmail.com.