Buy Photo Bethany Lerch (Photo: Oshkosh Northwestern Media File Photo)Buy Photo

The Affordable Care Act has been in place for less than a year, but not all Americans want to be on it. I have a theory: This apprehension stems from not knowing exactly what it will look like and how it will function. As a member of a health care system similar to what the United States is implementing, I’d like to provide some insight.

There are many an unacquainted stereotype surrounding healthcare schemes in Europe. Too many. I’d like to focus on Germany and one of the most rampant stereotypes about this health care system starts with “s” and seems to unnecessarily frighten the tar out of some people. “Socialized medicine” is defined as a system regulated by government and subsidized by taxation. Germany’s system is government regulated, but it does not survive and thrive via taxes. It is near-universal healthcare meaning everyone has to be covered and no one can one can be declined.

Coverage extends to approximately 90 percent of the population. The remaining one in 10 gross more than 4,460 euros per month and are free to insure themselves privately at a higher cost. Polling indicates that 85 percent of privately insured are satisfied with their coverage. It also shows that 85 percent of publicly insured are satisfied with theirs, too.

Proof of insurance was one step of many in securing my university work contract. But, first I had to choose an insurance collective. There are more than 160 nonprofit insurance collectives here, so I asked around. Multiple trusted friends recommended one known as Barmer. Getting set up was remarkably easy. I Googled their Leipzig location, walked there in less than 10 minutes, and registered in less than 10 minutes. My European Health Insurance Card arrived within one week.

Here, insurance collectives pay the doctors and the collectives are replenished with automatic deductions from mine and others’ monthly paychecks. My employer and I pay the same – roughly 10 percent – and then, when I need to see someone, I can, and Barmer picks up the bill.

I didn’t need to take advantage of my coverage until January, but I didn’t fully appreciate it until months later when I began to see symptoms of a very serious condition. I called my doctor to make an appointment and saw her in just a few days. Afterwards, I was referred to a specialist and given an appointment within two weeks. I wouldn’t wish that situation on anyone—certainly not anyone alone in a foreign country. I’m glad I was in this one, though.

Part of the reason why a tough time was made easier is because there was never any payment expected. Granted, my automatic contributions are not the same as a banker’s and nor can they be compared to a part-time retailer, but we all pay the same fraction of our earnings. Really, we all pay what we can and we all receive the same care.

This system doesn’t ruffle feathers because Germans despise inequality. “Access” and “solidarity” are two critical concepts here. People accept the costs of the system to ensure coverage for everyone because they believe everyone deserves it. It’s nice, that mindset. It’s real nice.

These are not new concepts and Germany’s system is not a young one. On the contrary, it’s been in place for more than 130 years. Are my taxes high? They are, yes, but that has nothing to do with my healthcare. Do I have to wait? Sure, but I’ve had to wait just as long at Aurora.

I’m not saying the old healthcare system in the United States is good or bad. What I am saying, though, is that it needs to be fixed. I’m also saying that the Affordable Care Act is a viable alternative.

As a member of a system that looks very nearly like the ideal, I can say with certitude that it functions well. This effectiveness stems from government regulation, the kind of regulation that keeps costs down, which is what we need. In fact, the German government scolded the collectives for taking in too much last fiscal year, so I’m expecting a refund.

Bethany Lerch is a UW-Oshkosh and University of St Andrews graduate, a Fulbright and Rotary Foundation alum. She is an Assistant Lecturer of American Studies at the University of Leipzig in Germany. Her next teaching assignment is with young refugees in Palestine’s West Bank. Follow her work and writing at bethanylerch.com.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1tOb6Gx