Conservative talk radio host Mark Levin ripped House Oversight Committee Chair Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, for stripping Rep. Mark Meadows of his subcommittee chairmanship after he defied party leaders.

Levin referred to the top three House leaders — Speaker John Boehner, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy and Majority Whip Steve Scalise — as “Moe, Larry and Curley,” with Chaffetz being the “shrimp in there somewhere.”

“The shrimp I guess would be Jason Chaffetz,” Levin said. “Jason Chaffetz is a fraud. Jason Chaffetz pretends to be conservative but is John Boehner’s boy. He’s his lap dog.”

Meadows was one of 34 conservatives who voted against the rule to move the trade deal forward, which will provide the president with fast-track negotiating authority and expand Trade Adjustment Assistance – a leftwing entitlement program that was added to grease Democrats’ palms.

Levin’s outrage over GOP leaders punishing their own members for fighting to stop what many view as a bad deal with President Obama, was echoed within conservative circles.

“House Republican leaders have punished another conservative lawmaker for standing up for our principles,” Senate Conservatives Fund President Ken Cuccinelli said in an email to PPD. “Freedom-loving Americans need to fight back.”

Senate Conservatives have pledged to raise funds for Rep. Meadows until July 1st, at which point the group will start to decide whether to endorse and support him throughout the rest of his campaign.

“But right now, we’re going to do everything we can to support him,” Cuccinelli added. “This man is a leader and we need to defend him against these attacks.”

As Levin rightly pointed out, Speaker Boehner and House leaders have targeted various conservatives in an effort to silence critics and move their particular special interest-favored legislation forward without fail. Meadows, who stated he simply “voted his conscience,” was made an early example.

“The Republican establishment is trying to make an example out of Congressman Meadows so other conservatives won’t fight to stop more deals with President Obama later this year,” Cuccinelli added. “Speaker Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell want to pass a massive highway bailout, raise the debt limit, and save Obamacare’s subsidies and mandates if the Supreme Court strikes them down.”

PPD previously reported and confirmed that McConnell and House leaders are prepared to backstab the base and conservative members if the Supreme Court nixes ObamaCare subsidies this month.