AIM: A man aims a cannon Sunday at The Colorado Springs Muzzle Loaders Inc.'s 39th annual Memorial Day Black Powder Shoot. (Christy Steadman / Daily Record)

One year, there were more than 500 people to participate, but the average is about 150 to 300, which is the estimated amount of registered shooters to participate in this year's 39th annual Memorial Day Black Powder Shoot, hosted by The Colorado Springs Muzzle Loaders Inc. at Florence Mountain Park.

Joy Hicks, president of The Colorado Springs Muzzle Loaders Inc., said this is the 25th year they've hosted the competition at this site, and people attended from "all over" to participate. She said there were people from across Colorado and some from Kansas, Wyoming, Illinois and Arizona.

"There's shoots about every other weekend, but this is the biggest one," said Earl Goecker, of Black Forest, who has participated in the Black Powder Shoot for 38 consecutive years.

Goecker said the amount of spectators that come to watch the competition varies, as they come and go for different events, but usually averages to about a couple hundred people.

Marlin Johnson, of Florence, who has been participating in shoots since 1970, said the Black Powder Shoot is a "qualification club" competition. He said winners from this weekend will go to The Colorado State Muzzle Loading Association's 2014 State Master's Tournament in Fort Lupton, which is Aug. 29 through Sept. 1.

Johnson said there are two categories for each event in the competitions — caplock and flintlock, which are types of rifles.

Although the shoots are competitions, many participants bring their families and camp for the weekend.

Advertisement

"It's a good family outing," Goecker said.

He said for children, there are various games for them to participate in, such as runs, tug-of-war or "the ones with the eggs." Goecker said there is also an area, where spectators can learn to shoot.

Wade Sandell, of Castle Rock, brought his family to compete on the cannons in the Black Powder Shoot. He said there are about 13 or 14 people on the cannons, which mostly consist of families who live in the area.

FIRE!: A cannon is fired Sunday at The Colorado Springs Muzzle Loaders Inc.'s 39th annual Memorial Day Black Powder Shoot. (Christy Steadman / Daily Record)

Richard "Singe" Stites has been running the cannon range since 1976, and he said it is "a lot of fun, but a lot of work."

"We're the big shots," he said. "You tell that from the sound."

Hicks said as a member of The Colorado Springs Muzzle Loaders Inc., people can be involved with shotgun, cannon, rifle, pistol, revolver and knife and tomahawk. She said it is an "all-volunteer group" and Johnson added that events, such as the Black Powder Shoot, shows how well they work together.

"We're a well-oiled team," Johnson said.

Johnson said this year the turn-out of competitors is lower than usual. He said there was a time when if less than 350 shooters came to participate, they were disappointed.

"It's a dying art," Johnson said. "We definitely want to get more young people involved, if we can."