WASHINGTON -- For the first time in his 10-year Senate career, David Vitter is a committee chair and has the potential to get floor votes -- and maybe even pass -- some of his huge stack of bills that stalled in previous congresses.

But don't think the new Senate Republican majority - the first since 2006 - is causing Vitter second thoughts about running for governor next year.

Vitter said he had always anticipated Republicans would recapture the Senate in the 2014 mid-term elections, though he acknowledges that increasing the GOP caucus from 45 to 54 members -- including Bill Cassidy of Baton Rouge -- is on the high side of even his rosy projections.

"In general, I'm very optimistic about this year in the Senate and what we can do in what I hope will be my last year," Vitter said in an interview.

Vitter said he personally has four top priorities:

Working to block President Barack Obama's executive order to put off deportations of an estimated 5 million illegal immigrants. The president said with United States unable to deport all 11 million illegal immigrants, it makes sense to go after law evaders and allow families to remain together - the children who are here in the country legally with parents who are not. But Vitter calls the order a "dangerous" overreach in executive authority that will only encourage more people to enter the United States illegally.

His second is to try, as a new member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, to block the president's nomination of Loretta Lynch as attorney general, part of his protest over Obama's immigration order. Other Republicans, including Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, have said they are genuinely impressed with Lynch, the top federal prosecutor in New York City, but Vitter came away from a one-on-one meeting with her Wednesday "disappointed" she didn't answer his questions directly.

His third is helping pass highway and transportation bill. "All you have to do is drive around Baton Rouge virtually anytime and see the relentless congestion," Vitter said. Some Republicans and Democrats have proposed increasing gas tax taxes to pay for road improvements, an idea Vitter said he won't entirely rule out, though he's like to consider alternatives - such as using revenue from increased oil and gas production.

No. 4, Vitter wants to use his chairmanship of the Senate Small Business Committee to help small businesses grow and hire more Americans.

And yes, Vitter said he will continue his efforts to require lawmakers, their staffs, and top officials at the White House to buy policies from Affordable Care Act exchanges -- as long as the health law remains -- without any federal subsidies. Vitter said it's only fair lawmakers and key congressional and White House staffers experience what regular taxpayers are with the Affordable Care Act. Some members, including a fair number of Republicans, accuse him of grandstanding, proposing limitations on public officials that don't exist for other federal employees, or even most workers at large private businesses, who generally get subsidized health insurance at work.

Asked how he'll complete his ambitious legislative agenda and run for governor at the same time, Vitter said it won't be hard because he returns to his Metairie home every week after the Senate's last vote -- sometimes late Thursday or Friday afternoon -- and during congressional recesses.

Vitter said he normally spends a lot of that non-Senate time meeting with constituents at Town Hall meetings, but this time he will be spending more of that time campaigning.

Despite rumblings that he might run a Rose Garden campaign because of polls showing him the early frontrunner, Vitter insists "that isn't going to happen."

"It's not in my nature," said Vitter who promises a vigorous effort to interact with voters, including a full discussion of issues important to the state.

On the Affordable Care Act, which Vitter and virtually every congressional Republican want to repeal, the Louisiana senator is hopeful the GOP can make progress -- despite President Obama's pledge to vote any major rollbacks on his signature health law.

Vitter said he agrees that repeal alone isn't enough, that the GOP has to find a way to help people with pre-existing conditions get affordable coverage, and keep premiums down, which he believes can be accomplished via increased competition, -- such as allowing group polices to be sold across state lines.

Earlier, Vitter differentiated himself from current Gov. Bobby Jindal, saying that if the Affordable Care Act is still the law he'd strongly consider accepting the law's Medicaid expansion to increase coverage and lower health costs for the state.

Vitter started the new Senate session, the same way he's started all the others -- introducing dozens of bills. On Wednesday, an aide was carrying a thick pile of bills -- perhaps 60 in all -- from Vitter's Senate Hart Office Building suite to the clerk's office for formal introduction.

Among the bills introduced during the first week of Congers were some Vitter perennials: Ending automatic cost of living increases for members of Congress - a measure Vitter says has helped stop pay hikes since 2009; and a measure limiting Senators to two-six year terms and House members to three-two year terms.

With all those bills to limit members' health insurance options, impediments to pay increases, and limiting fellow senators from serving more than two terms, it's hardly a mystery why Vitter isn't the most popular member with some of his colleagues.

Vitter, 53, is a former House member, Louisiana state legislator, who graduated with a bachelor's degree from Harvard University and a law degree from Tulane University. He's married to Wendy (Baldwin) and the couple has four children.