In this Nov. 2010 file photo, Louis Zamperini is shown at his Hollywood home. The Torrance hero died July 2 at the age of 97. File/Brad Graverson/Staff Photographer

A local school district official’s exorbitant salary and a local hero’s passing just as a movie honoring his extraordinary life was set to be released topped the news in the South Bay in 2014.

Centinela Valley Unified School District Superintendent Jose Fernandez’s pay package revealed in the Daily Breeze proved to be his downfall and resulted in months of chaos at board meetings.

At the same time, local hero Louie Zamperini, an Olympian who survived 45 days on the open ocean after his plane crashed in World War II and who endured years of torture in Japanese prison camps, died at age 97.

Elsewhere, Toyota stunned the South Bay with its announcement that it was leaving Torrance, and the Forum in Inglewood reopened as a premier concert venue with top acts.

In crime, a San Pedro man was charged with burning the San Pedro Elks Lodge to the ground; a disabled woman rammed into pedestrians crossing Pacific Coast Highway in Redondo Beach following a church Christmas show; and a mother allegedly stabbed her three young daughters to death at their home near Carson.

In nature, a social media phenomenon at a Rancho Palos Verdes cliff drew thrill-seeking teens, but proved to be deadly; and a swimmer was bitten by a great white shark off Manhattan Beach.

And, in lighter news, a giant inflatable duck drew crowds to the Los Angeles Harbor.

Here are the top stories of 2014 in the South Bay and Harbor Area, in chronological order:

Forum’s reopening is fabulous

The year kicked off on an up note on Jan. 14, when the Eagles six-night concert stint reopened the “fabulous Forum” in Inglewood as a top-flight concert venue. The Forum made its comeback thanks to a $100 million renovation spearheaded by Madison Square Garden Co., which owns and operates the famed Madison Square Garden in New York as well as several other venues throughout the country.

The company’s reopening of the Forum marked its first West Coast venture. Following the Eagles, the Forum has hosted several sold-out shows — including Justin Timberlake, Stevie Wonder and Fleetwood Mac — and plans to continue the momentum with other major headliners in 2015.

The Forum, restored to its vibrant red color from its younger years, can now seat up to 17,500 fans and has an additional 8,000 square feet of hospitality space on its first floor. Food and beverages at the venue also got a major upgrade, with craft beers and iconic L.A. eats like Pink’s Hot Dogs served during events.

Advertisement

Toyota announces its future is in Texas

Toyota announced in April it would relocate its North American headquarters from Torrance to Texas, taking 3,000 jobs out of the South Bay over the next two years.

State and city politicians expressed dismay that California would be losing yet another company to the Lone Star State, which has looser regulations on business and lower taxes.

Toyota said the planned move, which would be completed by 2017, is part of a larger corporate restructuring that will put executives closer to the carmaker’s plants in Texas, Mississippi, Kentucky and Alabama.

Toyota has offered generous relocation packages to help employees make the move to Plano, a wealthy suburb of Dallas. But since many employees are unlikely to uproot their families, some automotive analysts said the relocation was a way to thin out the ranks of midlevel managers.

“At this point, I would go,” Toyota strategist Chris Peterson said in April. “But that’s me being single with no kids, so it’s a much easier decision for me.”

San Pedro Elks Lodge torched

In April, the San Pedro Elks Lodge, a two-story, 34,000-square-foot building with a harbor view, fell victim to predawn arson, drawing shock from throughout the close-knit community that mourned the loss of the popular social hub since the 1960s.

Nick Pecarich, 79, of San Pedro, a retired dockworker who belonged to the 2,000-member lodge at 1748 Cumbre Drive but had had recent run-ins with fellow members, was arrested and charged with the crime but awaits further legal determination about his mental status.

The Los Angeles architectural firm of SRK was hired this summer to begin work on new designs, and lodge members hope the new lodge can be finished sometime in early 2016.

Mother allegedly kills her own daughters

Prosecutors charged Carol Coronado with murder in May after she allegedly stabbed her three children to death in their home near Carson while her husband worked on his truck outside. Their bodies were neatly arranged on Coronado’s bed — Xenia, 3 months, on the left; Yazmine, 16 months, in the center; and Sophia, 2, on the right.

A grand jury indicted her in October on three counts of capital murder, along with an attempted murder count alleging she lunged at her mother with the knife.

Prosecutors believe the killings were premeditated, committed by Coronado to get back at her husband because he planned to divorce her and neglected to help care for the children.

Coronado pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity to the charges. The defense said she suffered from postpartum depression.

Coronado is in custody awaiting trial.

Rancho Palos Verdes cove enticing, deadly

An 18-year-old Long Beach man died and more than 50 stranded swimmers and hikers were rescued from coves along the coast of Rancho Palos Verdes during a dramatic Fourth of July weekend.

A combination of holiday weekend visitors and thrill-seekers drawn to the area by videos of dives posted on social media created a recipe for danger when a winter storm off of Australia caused strong riptides. Joseph Sanchez did not survive a dive from a cliff at Inspiration Point, and a dangerous rescue by two men at Abalone Cove was captured on video.

In the wake of the events that weekend, the city recognized lifeguards and the civilian rescuers, and the Abalone Cove Safety Task Force was formed. The multiagency task force stepped up patrols and outreach to beachgoers, put up new hazard warning signs and filmed a public service announcement. The group was bracing itself for similar conditions on Labor Day weekend, but strong rip currents closed the coves altogether.

Several residents, including professional surfer Chris Del Moro, urged the Rancho Palos Verdes City Council to raise parking fees at Abalone Cove Shoreline Park to curb visitorship — which has tripled in the past few years — something it will consider next year.

Great white shark bites swimmer

A great white shark struggling to break free from a fisherman’s line attacked a swimmer just south of the Manhattan Beach Pier on July 5, one of the busiest beach days of the year.

Long distance swimmer Steven Robles had been approaching the pier with a group of fellow swimmers when he came face to face with the juvenile great white shark, which had been wrangling with the fisherman for about 45 minutes. The shark bit into Robles’ torso, leaving him with lacerations across his side and chest and a severed artery in his finger.

The attack triggered uproar in the community and questions over how fishermen and those recreating in the water were to coexist. Community members and environmental/wildlife groups like PETA urged city leaders to permanently ban fishing off the pier as shark sightings, especially in Manhattan Beach, continue to rise.

After a temporary — and illegal — ban on fishing off the pier, the City Council in August approved stricter regulations for fishers, including chumming, cleaning fish on the pier, and a ban on large lines and hooks used to catch sharks.

Residents fight cemetery funerals just feet from homes

A peculiar situation at Green Hills Memorial Park raised eyebrows — and tempers — in July, after residents of a Lomita condominium complex complained to the city of Rancho Palos Verdes about funerals taking place a stone’s throw from their balconies on the roof of the cemetery’s new $2.5 million Pacific Terrace Mausoleum.

The rooftop burial ground’s location just eight feet away from the complex’s pool area created an unsettling feeling for both condo residents and mourners on the other side of the fence.

“Somebody could do a cannonball in our pool and might splash the people up there mourning,” said one condo owner, Matt Geier. “We’re sitting there eating brunch on the weekends and we have people right outside our window crying their eyes out.”

Tensions rose so high that the cemetery accused residents of allegedly disrupting the funerals. Attorneys were retained and public hearings were packed.

An investigation found that a variance was actually needed to build the massive mausoleum so close to the property line, and the cemetery was told to apply for one after-the-fact, something its attorney disputes. It was also discovered that Green Hills buried 13 people illegally in another area of the park.

A blame game between the city and cemetery is at play, and, in November, the Planning Commission enacted a moratorium on services and plot sales on the roof. An appeal filed by Green Hills is set to go before the Rancho Palos Verdes City Council on Jan. 20.

Olympian, war hero, subject of movie, dies

Also in July, Torrance hero Louis Zamperini, named as grand marshal of the 2015 Tournament of Roses Parade, died from complications of pneumonia, just months before celebrity director Angelina Jolie’s tribute to his life, “Unbroken,” was set to open in movie theaters across the nation.

Based on Laura Hillenbrand’s best-selling 2010 novel of the same name, the film chronicling Zamperini’s life as an Olympian who endured torture in a Japanese camp through World War II was the runaway top opener on Christmas Day, bringing in $15.6 million for its debut.

Zamperini never saw the completed movie, but Jolie showed him much of the film’s raw footage just before he died when Jolie visited him in the hospital with her laptop.

Five members of Zamperini’s family, including his two children, Luke and Cynthia Zamperini-Garris, and his grandson, Clay, will sit in for him in the Rose Parade’s grand marshal’s open-topped car.

The Torrance parade float also will pay tribute to the man who became a beloved and inspirational speaker following his post-war conversion to Christianity.

Superintendent’s salary sparks outrage, firing

The Centinela Valley school board fired Superintendent Jose Fernandez in August, wrapping up a six-week termination process that began after the Daily Breeze revealed his excessive compensation package — among the highest in the state — earlier in the year.

Fernandez, 54, who took the job in 2008 leading the district with schools in Lawndale and Hawthorne, earned at least $663,000 in 2013. He also took a $910,000 low-interest loan from the district to buy a home. The FBI and Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office were quick to open probes.

More reporting revealed that the district was paying about $100,000 a year to cover the premiums on two whole life insurance policies for Fernandez. The money was not reported as taxable income, meaning his compensation might have surpassed $750,000.

Fernandez did score some victories while in office. The district was removed from the county’s watch list for its troubled finances, and two construction bond measures passed to bring hundreds of millions of dollars to rebuild dilapidated campuses.

Fernandez has filed a wrongful termination claim, which the district denied. The district, meanwhile, is looking for a permanent replacement.

Giant duck proves to be ducky in San Pedro

Some laughed. Others mocked. Everyone took pictures.

But no one denied that a ridiculous-looking, 61-foot-tall, yellow rubber duck was the runaway hit of this year’s Port of Los Angeles Tall Ships Festival in August.

While many made fun, the duck — one of several floating sculptures designed by Dutch artist Florentijn Hofman — could not be ignored.

Bobbing ahead of the parade of ships arriving for the five-day event Aug. 20-24, the giant inflatable was credited with bringing some 277,000 people to the Los Angeles Waterfront in Wilmington and San Pedro, the most ever for a port-sponsored event.

Most agreed it outshined the tall ships and was a spectacular hit when it came to bringing people to the San Pedro waterfront, which is in the midst of redevelopment.

A miniature version — a 10-foot-tall “baby” duck — made a surprise encore appearance in December when the port kicked off its free Holidays by the Sea series. Baby Duck was dressed for the occasion, wearing earmuffs and a scarf.

Freedom at last for innocent woman

Susan Mellen, 58, walked out of the Torrance courthouse in October a free woman when Judge Mark Arnold overturned her murder conviction. She spent 17 years behind bars for a homicide she did not commit.

Jurors had convicted Mellen for killing Richard James Daly, whose body was found burning in a San Pedro alley in 1997. Daly, prosecutors said, was bound with electrical wire, gagged, beaten with a hammer at a Lawndale home, dumped and set on fire.

Mellen maintained her innocence, but a woman, June Patti, told detectives Mellen had stuffed a scarf down Daly’s throat. Patti told her story in court, even though Patti was known to be a pathological liar. Patti’s own sister, a Torrance police officer, even said so.

But Mellen’s attorney never brought that up in court.

Attorneys at Torrance-based Innocence Matters took up Mellen’s case in 2013, and convinced the District Attorney’s Office that a mistake had been made. Mellen was released in time to spend Thanksgiving with her children and grandson.

Arnold declared Mellen factually innocent in November, making her eligible to receive nearly $600,000 in compensation from the state.

Woman hits crowd in crosswalk, killing four

A physically disabled woman, allegedly under the influence of prescription drugs, plowed into a group of pedestrians leaving a church Christmas concert in Redondo Beach on Dec. 17, killing four and injuring several others.

Margo Bronstein, 56, of Redondo Beach pleaded not guilty to four counts of gross vehicular manslaughter while intoxicated. She is in custody on $500,000 bail awaiting her next court date in January.

Mary Ann Wilson, 81, Saeko Matsumura, 87, Martha Gaza, 36, and her son, Samuel Gaza, 6, all of Torrance, were killed in the crash. Gaza’s husband and two daughters also were injured.

A dozen pedestrians were crossing Pacific Coast Highway at Vincent Street, headed back to their cars after a Christmas program at St. James Catholic Church, when Bronstein allegedly drove around cars stopped for a red light, struck the pedestrians in the crosswalk and then veered head-on into a southbound Honda Fit.

“I really don’t know what to say, it’s so devastating,” said Redondo Beach Mayor Steve Aspel. “This is a very tight-knit community. It’s horrible — people go to a Christmas pageant, walk out and five minutes later, you’re obliterated. It just doesn’t seem fair.”

Staff writers Larry Altman, Megan Barnes, Carley Dryden, Jordan England-Nelson, Donna Littlejohn and Mariecar Mendoza contributed to this report.