Reuters

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump had a question-and-answer session with "The 700 Club" minister Pat Robertson at Regent University in Virginia recently, and the latter was so impressed with Trump's answers that he gave him his seal of approval.

"You inspire us all," Robertson told the real estate mogul, who has also secured the endorsement of Liberty University President Jerry Falwell, Jr.

During the live TV interview, Trump heavily criticised the current U.S. budget situation, CBN News reported.

"We owe $19 trillion—most people don't even know what a trillion dollars is, how many hundreds of millions is in a trillion," Trump said.

"A very bad budget was passed just about four weeks ago that's going to add at least $2 trillion to it. So we'll be up essentially to $21 trillion, and at a certain point it's really the point of no return. And you really have to have somebody that knows what he or she is doing," he added.

Advertisement

Robertson also asked Trump what his basis would be in nominating people to the Supreme Court. Trump emphatically answered that he would choose somebody who is "pro-life," someone who is "very conservative" and "very smart" like Justice Antonin Scalia who recently passed away.

While Trump is all praise for Scalia, he said he can't say the same thing to Chief Justice John Roberts who "could have killed Obamacare twice" but did not. "He approved Obamacare when everybody said 'We're going to terminate it,'" Trump said.

As president, Trump said he would get rid of Obamacare, which he described as a "total disaster."

Another thing that Trump does not like about the current administration is the deal it made with Iran. "I didn't want to go into Iraq; it was one of the worst decisions ever made," Trump said.

"We lost $2 trillion, thousands and thousands of lives. We have wounded warriors who I love all over the place, and what happens? Iran is now taking over Iraq," he said.

"When you think of how Iran is doing lately, right? Between the Iran deal, we give them $150 billion—we got nothing for it," he added. "We should have gotten our prisoners back long before we started negotiating...[Secretary John] Kerry—[he] is the worst negotiator I think I've ever seen."