Two Air France flights from the U.S. to Paris were diverted after bomb threats were received.

The flights, from Los Angeles International Airport and Washington Dulles International Airport in Virginia, were both diverted on their way to Paris on Wednesday after anonymous bomb threats were received while they were in flight, according to officials with the French airline.

"Air France confirms that flights AF065 from Los Angeles (LAX) to Paris Charles de Gaulle (CDG) and AF055 en route from Washington Dulles (IAD) to Paris Charles de Gaulle (CDG) were subjects of anonymous threats received by telephone after their respective take-offs," the company said in a statement. "As a precautionary measure and to conduct all necessary security checks, Air France, applying the safety regulations in force, decided to request the landings of both aircraft."

Air France later tweeted that the threats against its flights were a false alarm.

False alert following an anonymous threat on #AirFrance flights #AF055 and #AF065 / November 17th https://t.co/HLSPSVKOAg — Air France Newsroom (@AFnewsroom) November 18, 2015

The flights were diverted to Salt Lake City and Halifax, Canada respectively.

ADVERTISEMENT

Air France said local officials in both locations investigated the threats against the Air France jets and found no evidence that they were legitimate.

"Local authorities have carried out complete inspections of the aircraft, the passengers and their luggage, confirming a false alert," the company said. "An investigation will be led by the authorities to identify the source of the telephone call."

Air France said passengers were reboarded onto the flight that originated in Los Angeles, but travelers who were on board the Washington, D.C., flight were forced to stay in Halifax overnight because of scheduling restrictions on its crew.

"Due to crew flight time limits regulations, AF055 has been postponed to Wednesday November 18 and renumbered AF4093, departing at 7.00pm, local time. Estimated arrival at Paris Charles de Gaulle at 6.00am on November 19th. Passengers have been accommodated in Halifax," the company said.

"In Salt Lake City, Delta's teams were mobilized to assist our passengers. AF065 took off from Salt Lake City to Paris at 0.29am local time and is estimated time to arrive in Paris Charles de Gaulle at 5.37pm, local time," the airline statement continued.

The emergence landings come amid heightened tensions after last Friday night’s attacks in Paris, where a series of coordinated strikes killed 129 people across the French capital.

The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria has claimed credit for the Paris attacks, and the group has also threatened to conduct terror attacks in the U.S.

The group also claims to have taken down a Russian jet carrier flying over Egypt.

-This story was updated with new information at 8:43 a.m.