Vazquez addresses the key presentation ceremony for Marine Cpl. Jason Hallet and his wife Rachel and their new home. (Photo: Don Reichert)

Windsor Mayor John Vazquez has served as mayor for eight years.

In April, Vazquez’s term will end and he plans to continue serving the town as an involved resident, but he said he does not see the need to plan more than that.

Vazquez was born in Covington, Kentucky, grew up in Michigan and moved to Colorado in 1990. He graduated with a degree in civil engineering from Colorado State University. He was elected as mayor in April 2008 and to a second term in April 2012.

After eight years of serving as mayor, Vazquez said he has not made plans for the next chapter of his life, because plans always change. He said he wants to trust in his faith and that the next step will come organically.

“I honestly haven’t given what is next a whole lot of thought,” Vazquez said. “For now, I’m focusing on finishing the term strong and being in the present.”

Vazquez said he has been proud to see Windsor boom from a “bedroom community,” where residents commute to jobs outside of the community, to a major employer.

“I’ve been very blessed to be part of a transition from a town on the brink to leaving office to a town that has really set its path and garnered its identity,” Vazquez said. “We have transitioned from having no dot on the map to a premier community in Northern Colorado.”

Vazquez said he is proud of many projects he has been involved in and is especially proud of the leadership’s work on the Regional Tourism Act, which if passed, will lead to the construction of the Peligrande Resort and further growth in Windsor.

The success of Windsor over the past eight years can be credited to a strong leadership and involved community, not his work alone, Vazquez said.

“It takes an entire board to move the community forward,” Vazquez said. “Over the years I have been fortunate to work with some very special individuals, and as a group we have accomplished some great things.”

Board Member Robert Bishop-Cotner, who has served on the board for the eight years Vazquez has been mayor, said Vazquez was an important part of the reconstruction of Windsor after a tornado that damaged the town in 2008.

“It took us nine days to do what it takes some communities to do in months,’’ Bishop-Cotner said. “He is the guy who has the charisma and energy to get people to believe in the impossible.”

Board Member Kristie Melendez said Vazquez will end his position as mayor with leaving Windsor a better place.

“John is a great example of what anyone would want in a leader,” Melendez said. “He truly cares about the community and the people in it.”

Vazquez said he plans to continue serving the Windsor community, only this time it will be only as a citizen without the mayor title.

“I’ve never considered myself anything other than a community member,” Vazquez said. “I hope future leaders carry the baton and continue to govern Windsor how it has been governed for 125 years.”

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/1F7voz4