Coding and Training Clinicians LLC is approved by the AAPC to train students using the AAPC CPC curriculum.

Coding and Training Clinicians LLC, one of the industry leaders in teaching medical coding courses using the AAPC curriculum, has announced that the company will be offering an AAPC CPC Exam Pass Guarantee Program. This program, deemed to be unique in the industry, provides the assurances needed to help people change their lives in a positive direction while looking for a more satisfying career by providing them the support they need to know that their investment in themselves will provide a positive return.

Statistics show that students using source curriculum services to assist with medical coding certification preparation are 82% more likely to pass the AAPC CPC medical coding exam on the first try. CTCCoding.com uses both the AAPC curriculum and additional resources to train their students. The dedication of the AAPC Certified Professional Coder instructors at CTCCoding.com, excellent online resources and a student’s determination makes it possible to provide a guarantee that a student will pass the exam.

CTCCoding.com CEO Chatrione Harris has built an industry leading company by helping people to take the necessary steps to become certified in medical coding and billing. “It is about helping people to be confident in themselves and in our process that has allowed us to put together this one of a kind opportunity,” says Ms. Harris. “Our students see this as a win-win situation. They get the help they need to pass the certification test and then they can apply for one of the many positions available in this fast growing field of medical coding.”

The need for medical coding specialists is growing as the health care industry is transformed through the Affordable Care Act. Accurate recording of activities is the foundation of the streamlining process now underway throughout the medical industry. There are currently more than 4500 job openings in the United States on the website Indeed.com for positions involving medical coding.

About the Company: Coding and Training Clinicians LLC. was founded on the belief that the AAPC coding curriculum was one of the best medical coding curriculums available and is honored to offer medical coding classes using that curriculum. Chatrione Harris, the CEO of CTCCoding.com, learned how to code using the AAPC independent study program more than 15 years ago and is passionate about helping others to accomplish their goal of leading a successful and fulfilling life. All of Coding and Training Instructors receive vigorous training by the AAPC and have to pass the AAPC certification exam to teach using the AAPC curriculum. Courses are offered on-line and onsite at flexible and convenient hours.

Please contact Coding and Training Clinicians LLC. for more information:

http://www.ctccoding.com/

1-855-263-3669