Construction underway to replace Koldewyn home

Monica and Steve Koldewyn look out on to their field with their dog Julie on Saturday, Dec. 19, 2015 in Berthoud. The Koldewyns knew without question they'd rebuild their home on Blue Mountain Drive after a tornado destroyed it on June 4, 2015. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

During the first holiday season since tornadoes devoured their home near Berthoud, Steve and Monica Koldewyn aren't focused on their losses.

They know how lucky they were not to be home when the powerful force wrenched their home from its foundation and smashed it in a field six months ago.

They are looking to the future with construction of their new home underway and enjoyed the holidays with their family, hosted at someone else's home.

"We might make it a new tradition," Monica said.

Most Thursday afternoons and evenings, Monica would be at home with her granddaughters. But on June 4, instead, she was in Denver with her daughter.

Steve was at the golf course in Longmont.

Construction on Steve and Monica Koldewyn's new home, pictured here on Dec. 19, 2015, is underway and expected to be complete by Aug. 1. The basement's cement walls and foundation are in with framing to begin soon. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

And it was that evening that two tornadoes plowed through their neighborhood, damaging 20 structures. Six of those were homes that were either destroyed or very severely damaged, including the Koldewyns' on Blue Mountain Drive.

Theirs was literally lifted and smashed into the pasture behind their home, leaving not much of anything left to salvage.

"As it came this way, it got narrower," Steve described from hearing witness accounts of the tornado. "They say when it got here, it was 50 feet wide, and the house was 60 feet wide.

"We got lucky."

With the help of volunteer groups, family and friends, the Koldewyns salvaged some clothes and photos but not much else, save for one very special find.

Advertisement

The couple managed to locate their two wedding rings from the massive pile of insulation, twisted metal and splintered wood.

The rings had been on a dresser in the master bedroom, so Steve and Monica began their search among the wreckage of that room. And they found them: two small rings in a mountain of destroyed belongings.

Their two dogs, cat and herd of cattle all survived the tornado too, as did a chicken coop that, despite being mere feet from the house, was untouched.

As is only natural, Steve and Monica have their bad days where they think about what they lost, but they choose not to linger on the losses, they said. Instead, the Koldewyns said they focus on the kindness and help they received and the future.

They are living on their property in a recreational vehicle that they were able to buy used from donations through a Go Fund Me account.

The wreckage was cleaned up within five weeks with the help of volunteers.

And now, construction of their new home is underway.

This time, their house will have a basement to which they can retreat if there is another tornado.

"We always figured we'd go to the main bathroom (if there was a tornado), but the main bathroom was somewhere in the field," Steve said.

They loved their house on Blue Mountain Drive and realized that if they rebuilt to the same specifications, it wouldn't be the same.

So, Steve and Monica decided to go with something a little different.

One of the three bedrooms will now be in the basement, and the roof will have a steeper pitch to create a covered patio that wraps around three-fourths of the house. They also added a mud room and a few other touches.

The cement walls and foundation of the basement are in, the contractor should begin the framing soon, and the Koldewyns will be able to move in by Aug. 1.

"We're excited," Steve said. "We're looking forward to the new place ... It'll be great."

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.