President Barack Obama on “Between Two Ferns.” Funny or Die

President Barack Obama‘s decision to appear on Zach Galifianakis’s webseries “Between Two Ferns,” is drawing fire from conservatives. But could it be just what the doctor ordered for the American Care Act?

There are less than three weeks before the 2014 registration window for coverage under the Affordable Care Act closes, and the decision to shoot the video is stark evidence of the Obama Administration’s willingness to pull out all the stops in order to lift the percentage of young adults who’ve signed up for healthcare insurance under the law.

As Obama says midway through Galifianakis’s awkward interrogation, “Well, first of all, I think it’s fair to say that I wouldn’t be with you here today if I didn’t have something to plug. Have you heard of the Affordable Care Act?” (Galifianakis’s response: “Oh yeah, I heard about that, that’s the thing that doesn’t work. Why would you get the guy that created the Zune to make your website?”)

By standard metrics, the plug has been successful: The staged interview is already the online comedy website’s most-viewed video of the year, having soared from zero to 12 million views overnight; the hashtag associated with the video, #OBTF, had become a trending topic on Twitter, and Tara McGuinness, the White House’s dedicated Healthcare communications advisor, had a tweet posted on her account within hours of the video’s release that the webisode was now the single largest generator of visits to the ACA health exchange site HealthCare.gov:

Funnyordie video has 11 million views. http://t.co/a7HUExG0vg traffic for yesterday was up almost 40% from Monday. — Tara McGuinness (@HealthCareTara) March 12, 2014

By evening, HealthCare.gov had put some specific numbers behind McGuinness’s claim, announcing that the video had, on its own, generated over 32,000 visits to the site that day; McGuinness followed that up this morning with a retweeted report that traffic from FunnyorDie.com had helped to boost overall HealthCare.gov traffic by 40%.

But healthcare observers caution that it’s too soon to say whether the media stunt has truly succeeded in its underlying aim of enhancing the percentage of signups from 18 to 34 year olds from its current 25% toward a more actuarially appealing 40%. (Participation by younger — and proportionately, healthier — individuals is key to preventing the healthcare program from falling into a “death spiral” of skyrocketing rates and plummeting usage.)

“I think it’s smart of them to try something new to engage young people,” says Judy Wang, “founding hacker” of MIT’s healthcare and technology innovation incubator Hacking Medicine. “My fear is that showing up on a show like ‘Between Two Ferns’ doesn’t mean that the young people who do watch that show will take the ACA seriously. I don’t doubt its ability to get young people to at least visit the site, but has that translated into actual sign ups, and do young people actually understand why signing up at healthcare.gov is supposed to benefit them and their fellow citizens in the long run?”

That’s a fair question. The video, which features Obama in the typical role of a straight man forced to deal with Galifianakis’s barrage of aggressively insulting and nonsensical questions, ricochets from topics like the White House tradition of pardoning a turkey on Thanksgiving, to “Ambassador Dennis Rodman” going to North Korea (or perhaps, “North Ikea”), to a few of the hot-button personal tropes the Obama has had to confront during his two terms, including where he was born (he was born in Hawaii).

On the other hand, it also allows the President to state outright that HealthCare.gov “works great now,” that it has allowed millions of Americans to sign up for affordable health insurance, and that young invincibles can “get coverage…for what it costs to pay your cell phone bill.” And it underscores the March 31st deadline for 2014 coverage, and even the free 1-800-318-2596 HealthCare.gov hotline number for the few people watching the video — which is online, after all — who don’t have a computer capable of accessing the self-serve site.

Wang notes that the reasons why young people haven’t yet signed up in broad numbers range widely from ignorance — that is to say, lack of awareness of the HealthCare.gov site or the ACA’s potential benefits — to apathy, to outright resistance to the ACA as a program. The video, she agrees, addresses at least the category of young consumers. And the second might just resolve itself: “Young people tend to put things off until the last minute, so I wouldn’t be surprised if there was a spike in enrollments the day before the deadline” — though no one knows whether a 12th-hour surge will be able to give the program the actuarial mix it needs to thrive.

As with most viral videos, however, the disruptive value of the White House’s curveball maneuver isn’t readily measurable in the first day of its release; according to research by Unruly Media, sharing of viral videos tends to peak on the second day after release — which would be today — and to generate a quarter of their total shares by day three, 50% of their total after three weeks, and two-thirds after three months. So this video will be a gift that keeps on giving traffic well into the ACA deadline and beyond.

If it succeeds, expect more experiments with viral distribution to come from a White House that’s faced challenges in effectively getting the word out about ACA through traditional media sources, while dealing with an unending barrage of factually questionable right-wing advertising attacks. Can memes save Obama’s greatest legacy? We may be about to find out.