You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Even in today's freshman-dominated era of college basketball, the NCAA tournament hasn't always been kind to first-year players.

Last year's national champions, the University of Connecticut, were led by Shabazz Napier and Ryan Boatright, players with a combined seven years of experience. The year before, it was Louisville, led by senior guard Peyton Siva and junior shooter Russ Smith, who cut down the nets in Atlanta.

The 2012 Kentucky Wildcats have really been the exception to the rule over the last decade, with the likes of Anthony Davis, Michael-Kidd Gilchrist and Marquis Teague leading the way to the school's seventh national title. However, come Monday night, the Duke Blue Devils will try to ride the wave of a group of freshmen that are more poised than their ages would say.

In Duke's 81-61 win over Michigan State in the national semifinals, the Blue Devils' stellar freshman class accounted for 55 of their 81 points. Justise Winslow, who arguably has developed into Duke's best player over the last month and a half, led the way with 19 points and 9 rebounds. Don't believe me? In the last four NCAA tournament games (wins over San Diego State, Utah, Gonzaga and Michigan State) Winslow has averaged 17 points, 9 rebounds, 2 steals, 1.5 blocked shots and he's even converted 85 percent of his free throws after making just over 61 percent during the regular season.

Winslow certainly wasn't alone. Jahlil Okafor added 18 points while Tyus Jones and Grayson Allen tossed in nine points apiece. And, it may have been Allen's contribution that most emphatically demonstrates just what this group is all about. Allen is always in attack mode. One of the top recruits in the country, who didn't play at all on four occasions this year, Allen has become a major contributor for the Devils. Against the Spartans, Allen was in constant motion, rarely settled for jump shots and provided maybe the signature moment of the night.

Duke opened the second half on a 12-6 run, stretching an 11-point lead to 17 in just over four minutes. Then, when Allen misfired on a 3-point attempt from the left wing, he did what so many players don't. He followed his miss, grabbed the offensive rebound and brought down the house with a soaring, one-handed dunk. At that point, even though there were almost 15 minutes left, it was mostly over but the final score. Allen epitomized this game for Duke, who managed to cruise to a 20-point win over a gritty Michigan State team in spite of making just two 3-point shots.

Not to be forgotten, senior guard Quinn Cook was strong in the win Saturday night. Like the "kids", he also didn't settle for long-range shots, instead following his younger teammates by driving the ball into the lane for higher-percentage shots. Cook was clearly an impressive part of the overall package with 17 points in 35 minutes of cool, calm leadership. But, the Devils are playing the final game of the year because this freshman class is more mature and reliable than any in recent memory.

Less than four minutes into the game Michigan State had a 14-6 lead. Denzel Valentine made his first three jumpers from outside the 3-point line, Travis Trice added another and the Spartans were off to the lightning fast start they had to have to overcome Duke's edge in talent. However, Duke freshmen scored the team's next 16 points -- nine from Okafor -- and with just over eight minutes left before halftime the Devils were in front for good.

In the face of all this Final Four pressure, knowing how badly their only senior wants to win a championship, this fabulous foursome of fearless players drove Cook straight to Monday night.