Q: I know that meditation makes people feel better, happier and calmer, but is there a scientific explanation of why it works? — Keith G., Carbondale, Illinois

A: Meditation has been practiced in one form or another for as long as recorded history. But it wasn’t until the 20th century that Western societies embraced it and began studying its physical effects. Now, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that more than 10 percent of you meditate at least occasionally (that’s more than 30 million “Oms” in North America alone).

We’re great advocates of mindfulness meditation (we both do it daily) and find that it reduces the stress response, refreshes the body and makes it easier to sort out tasks and thoughts. (For instructions on how to start meditating, visit sharecare.com.) And we’re glad that recent studies have shown that meditation can help women overcome fertility problems; lower blood pressure; relieve anxiety and depression; and ease pain and increase mobility in folks with arthritis. As we gain more understanding of the effects of meditation, we may find there are even more and more applications. Now we are starting to understand the science behind meditation. Using imaging and electrodes, researchers have discovered that, like biofeedback, meditation lets folks manipulate their brain’s alpha and beta waves’ rhythm, blocking out distractions or negative thoughts. Mindfulness practitioners seem to diminish their fightor- flight response centers and are more likely to utilize brain areas that control more rational thoughts. And a recent study found that long-term practice protects the brain’s gray matter from age-related atrophy!

So whether you enjoy meditating for the calm it brings you or you’re using it to help relieve a specific condition, the scientific evidence is growing that the benefits are more than ethereal. Say OM!

Q: I just saw the movie “Still Alice” about a 50-year-old woman with Alzheimer’s disease, and it made it all seem so hopeless. Is research turning up anything to help prevent or treat the problem? — Susan D., Colorado Springs, Colorado

A: As Alice Howland in “Still Alice,” Julianne Moore’s Academy Award-winning performance vividly portrays the hardships and heartbreak of early-onset Alzheimer’s, as her character’s once-rich intellectual and emotional life slips out of her grip.

And it’s a tale that personally touches the lives of many of you these days. An estimated 5.2 million North Americans have Alzheimer’s disease; 200,000 are 65 or younger.

By 2050, it’s estimated that more than 13.5 million people in North America will be living with Alzheimer’s. Fortunately, many researchers around the world are trying to improve diagnosis and treatments. Here are some recent breakthroughs:

■ Diagnosis: For years, only an autopsy could positively diagnose Alzheimer’s.

Now researchers are using brain scans to predict the onset of Alzheimer’s at its earliest stages. In one experiment, scientists at Duke University used an MRI technique called diffusion tensor imaging to reveal changes in the functioning of the brain’s white matter.

In another experiment, researchers used an MRI probe to track a super-tiny magnetized substance paired with an antibody that seeks out the earliest development of Alzheimer’s-associated amyloid beta brain toxins.

■ Treatment: To stop progressive brain damage, Danish researchers recently implanted nerve growth factor into the brain of a few people with Alzheimer’s, and it seemed to prevent further degradation of nerve function. And scientists in University of Southern California have found a way to harness the immune system that may help the body clear away brain-fogging toxic plaque associated with Alzheimer’s.

These are innovative and potentially gamechanging experiments. Until these discoveries and others produce concrete therapies, the best brain protection you can have is to maintain a healthy weight, avoid inflammatory foods (like saturated and trans fats, added sugars and syrups, and processed carbohydrates), get plenty of physical activity (10,000 steps a day, no excuses!), stay engaged in learning — whether it’s language, music or puzzles — and challenge yourself mentally every day.

Dr. Mehmet Oz is host of “The Dr. Oz Show,” and Dr. Mike Roizen is chief medical officer at the Cleveland Clinic Wellness Institute. Submit your health questions at www.doctoroz.com.