Historic Westside Neighborhood Association's 10th annual home tours held Nov. 15

Chris and Melinda Driscoll pose near the entry of their home on Pratt Street. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

When the double doors opened at 450 Pratt St. in Longmont revealing a grand room with original stained glass and vaulted ceilings, the Driscolls could practically hear the hymns pouring out of the former sanctuary.

The building on the corner of Pratt Street and Fifth Avenue across from Thompson Park was the First Church of Christ, Scientist from 1913 until 2004, when Louisville real estate agent Dave Sutton bought the property.

If you go What: 10th Annual Historic Home Tour, Art and Gift Sale When: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Nov. 15 Where: Longmont homes, 704 Bowen St., 416 Bowen St., 615 Lincoln St., 1017 4th Ave., 858 3rd Ave., 450 Pratt St.; Central Elementary School, 1020 4th Ave. Cost: $10 More info: http://hwnalongmont.wordpress.com

Sutton spent the next 18 months turning the church into a home, which his mother lived in for about eight years before Melinda and Chris Driscoll bought it in 2012.

"I didn't even look at the whole thing before I knew I wanted it," Melinda Driscoll said.

Passers-by are still fooled by the exterior of the 3,200-square-foot home with many of its original stained-glass windows, double doors and a small plaque on the brick wall that says "First Church of Christ Scientist 1913."

More than one family entered the home without knocking on Halloween, Driscoll said, thinking that the building housed a church that would be open and serving candy to area children.

That was not the first time that visitors have unknowingly tried to enter the home, Driscoll said, but signs on the doors that read "private residence" have cut down on intruders.

But next weekend, the Driscolls will open their home to visitors during the Historic Westside Neighborhood Association's 10th Annual Historic Home Tour, Art and Gift Sale.

The former church is one of six homes that will be open from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Nov. 15 and feature work by 15 local artists. Central Elementary School will also be open and featuring local art as part of the annual event and will benefit from the proceeds of ticket sales for this year's event.

The tours celebrate the residents and architecture of Longmont's Historic Westside Neighborhood between Main Street and Lincoln Street and from Third Avenue to Ninth Avenue, said Lonnie Dooley, a group leader for the neighborhood association.

Five of the homes on display on Bowen Street, Lincoln Street, Fourth Avenue and Third Avenue participated in last year's event, Dooley said. This is the first year that the home on Pratt will be featured, she said.

The front entrance of the former First Church of Christ, Scientist at 450 Pratt St., which is now the home of Chris and Melinda Driscoll. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

The Driscolls said they want to share their unique home — which Melinda Driscoll calls "the coolest house ever" — with the community.

While the outside retains much of the church's history, the inside is a cozy and welcoming home with nods to the building's past.

Displayed in the home's entryway, once the church lobby, is a framed page from a 1913 edition of the Denver Post that was used as insulation and recovered by Sutton during renovations. The entryway was added to the church in the 1950s and now includes a powder room and two staircases, one that leads down to the basement and the other up to the main level.

Upstairs, walls were added to the former sanctuary to create a master suite. The couple's headboard is two refurbished windows from a small church in New Mexico that Melinda Driscoll found on Craigslist.

Two exterior stained-glass windows are now featured in the wall between the kitchen and the master bedroom.

Where there was once a pulpit there is now a kitchen sink and the living room's sloped floors, which created stadium seating for about 75 church members, were leveled. But the high, slanted ceiling is intact and one of the couple's favorite features of the home.

Downstairs, the basement — where Sunday school classes were held — features three bedrooms, a bathroom and a gameroom for their son.

The dining area in the church-turned-home at 450 Pratt St. which (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Another addition that was added in the 1950s to the back of the house retains the church's display window.

The driveway behind the house and small alleyway to the south mark a trail that was once used as a drop off location for families in horse-drawn buggies, which Chris Driscoll said is just one of the quirks that still catches his eye.

"I do still find myself staring at it after two years," Chris Driscoll said.

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter