Indiana medical device manufacturers are hopeful that a recent bill — co-sponsored by U.S. Senators Dan Coats and Joe Donnelly — will pass with enough support to end a tax that they call burdensome and stifling to innovation.

But it must first survive a likely veto by President Barack Obama and if passed, it would remove billions in funding used to implement of the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare.

Last month, Republican Sen. Dan Coats and Democratic Sen. Joe Donnelly introduced the Medical Device Access and Innovation Protection Act. The legislation repeals the tax, and it has obtained bipartisan support so far. In 2014, 79 senators supported a non-binding vote to repeal the tax. With the House in Republican hands, a bill would likely pass there as well, but the legislation would need at least two-thirds of legislators in each chamber to override the President's veto.

Medical device manufacturing is a significant industry in Indiana, with more than 300 companies providing around 20,000 jobs and an additional 28,000 jobs are supported by the supply chain. Medical devices include surgical tools, wheelchair van lifts, artificial knees, IVs to bed pans. The 2.3 percent tax, which is projected to generate $26 billion over 10 years, is applied to a company's total sales.

Smiths Medical has a facility in Gary that produces Bivona tracheostomy tubes and employs about 200 people. Smiths' senior vice president of governmental relations, Chris Swonger, said financial impact of the tax has forced the company has had to close two faclities in England and Massachusetts

"It's put great strain on our business," Swonger said. "So we've been an active voice (in Washington, D.C.) talking to legislators about the impact of the medical device tax."

In an op-ed column last week, Coats cited a study by the Advanced Medical Technology Association (AdvaMed), which found that the tax impacted approximately 33,000 American jobs in 2013, either through layoffs or forgone jobs that would have been created.

Kathy Heuer, executive director of the Indiana Medical Device Manufacturers Council, said many companies have instituted hiring freezes and had to shelve research and development projects as well as expansion plans.

"Basically, every company really slowed down as far as expansion, hiring new employees, R&D," Heuer said. "So it's going to affect us dramatically if it's repealed."

Heuer said the average medical device manufacturing job pays about $70,000, which is signficantly higher than the state's median income of around $50,000.

Officials from Bloomington-based Cook Medical told a U.S. Senate committee in 2013 that plans to open five new manufacturing facilities in American towns are on hold, while they can use that money to pay the excise tax. While OrthoPediatrics — whilch develops orthopedic implants for children — was forced to shelve two development projects to devote funds to the tax.

The type of tax is daunting to entrepreneurs looking to enter the industry, Heuer said.

"They're taxed on revenues and not profits," Heuer said. "There's a company that makes devices for spines in my home county. They recently started and they are set to take a $1 million loss this year — which was in their business plan — but they still have to pay thousands in medical device excise taxes. It's very harmful to a smaller company."

But a January 2015 report by the Congressional Research Service indicate that tax's economic impact is very limited because the cost of the tax can be passed along to the consumer and the proposed revenues represent less than 0.01 percent in the estimated $40 trillion in health care spending over the next decade. In addition, the drop in output or jobs is projected to be no more than 0.2 percent, and it will likely have no effect on production location decisions, because both domestically manufactured and imported medical devices are subject to the excise tax.

Heuer said the repeal needs to be looked at separately from the ACA.

"We're not trying to dismantle the Affordable Care Act," Heuer said. "We've been asked if we should find a replacement tax, but finding a revenue stream is the job of the people in Washington. If we can find something to replace it, it should be spread across a whole industry as opposed to a specific segment like the medical device manufacturing industry."

The tax revenue may not even be necessary, Swonger said, citing a report last month from the Congressional Budget Office which said the projected cost of expanding insurance coverage will drop by $101 billion between 2015 and 2024.

"The CBO is saying the Affordable Care Act will cost $101 billion less than anticipated," Swonger said. "That demonstrates that you don't need the medical device tax."