By Chris Butler | Tennessee Watchdog

NASHVILLE — Tennessee Hospital Association officials wanted the state to expand Medicaid under Obamacare because, they said, they needed more revenue.

But they should have reviewed their member hospitals’ financial statements first.

Members of the state Senate’s Health and Welfare Committee voted Wednesday against Republican Gov. Bill Haslam’s proposal to expand Medicaid in Tennessee under Obamacare, known as Insure Tennessee, effectively killing it.

But throughout the debate THA officials made claims about their finances, which may not measure up when weighed against several Internal Revenue Service documents.

Tennessee Watchdog’s review of IRS statements from several THA-affiliated hospitals’ reveal some of their top officials made rather generous salaries, well over the reported national average, at least as recently as 2013.

Those IRS statements are available on the Economic Research Institute’s website.

THA officials did not immediately return a request for comment Wednesday.

As reported, if the plan had gone through hospitals would have covered the state’s share of rising Medicaid costs through a provider tax, meaning hospitals would have received their tax dollars back in the form of additional Medicaid spending.

But, President Craig Becker said on the organization’s website, extending health-care coverage would have led to a smaller amount of unreimbursed care.

In Memphis, now former Baptist Memorial Hospital CEO Stephen Reynolds made $2.5 million in 2012, a $1 million increase over what he made in 2007, according to IRS 990 statements

In Knoxville, Fort Sanders Regional Hospital CEO Anthony L. Spezia made $1.5 million in 2012.

The national average salary for a hospital CEO is $386,000, according to a New York Times story last year.

Memorial Health Care CEO James Hobson, meanwhile, made $644,738 in 2012 in Chattanooga, according to IRS statements.

Baptist Memorial spokeswoman Ayoka Pond said Reynolds presided over an organization that included 15 hospitals, not just one.

“If you’re trying to say that the THA’s support on Insure Tennessee has anything to do with the CEO’s salary, then I’d say that’s incorrect,” Pond said Tuesday.

“The information you are looking at is two years old.”

Corporate welfare

Lindsay Boyd, policy director of the free market think tank Beacon Center of Tennessee, which opposes Medicaid expansion, called the situation with the THA “corporate welfare at its worst.”

“We take no issue with upper management of private organizations paying their members according to what they believe is proper and what might be in line with their performance,” Boyd said Wednesday morning, before the bill was killed.

“What we take issue with is that the same organization misrepresented their finances to the state of Tennessee, calling for an expansion of an entitlement program to help them supposedly keep their doors open and to supposedly address razor thin margins that, if anything, don’t actually exist.”

Taxpayers, Boyd said, have no business bailing out hospitals that officials claim are financially troubled yet still pay their CEOs higher-than-average salaries.

“All of these instances suggest they are in a much different circumstance than they are representing, more concerned about corporate welfare than patient welfare,” Boyd said.

Erlanger Health System, a THA-affiliated hospital, received $19 million in federal money, the Chattanooga Times Free Press said last year.

Erlanger officials, while still warning of a financial crisis, then awarded their top management officials with huge bonuses — while freezing other employees’ vacation time.

Erlanger officials did not immediately return a request for comment Wednesday.

The same IRS statements show the CEO for the THA-affiliated Mountain States Health Alliance, based in Johnson City, made $3.1 million in 2012.

Five years earlier, that same CEO, Dennis Vonderfech, who’s in the same position, made significantly less — $774,697.

According to its website, MSHA oversees 12 different hospitals.

Contact Christopher Butler at chris@tennesseewatchdog.org

Follow Tennessee Watchdog and receive regular updates through Facebook and Twitter

Like Watchdog.org? Click HERE to get breaking news alerts in YOUR state!