AUSTIN — Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton on Wednesday filed a brief at the U.S. Supreme Court supporting a legal challenge to Obamacare. Paxton said the health law includes a tax that should have been considered first in the U.S. House, not the Senate.

Nine of his fellow Republican state attorneys general joined Paxton in the friend of the court brief. Last month, Texas’ two U.S. senators, Republicans John Cornyn and Ted Cruz, filed a similar brief attacking the health law.

The case was brought by Matt Sissel, a self-employed artist from Iowa. According to this 2014 Los Angeles Times story, Sissel’s lawyers told federal judges that he “could afford health insurance if he wanted,” but “does not have, need or want health insurance.”

The Affordable Care Act requires that Sissel either buy insurance or pay a tax. In 2012, the Supreme Court upheld the provision, known as the individual mandate. But Sissel argued the law violated the Constitution, which requires that “bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives.”

In 2010, with Democrats on the verge of losing their majorities in both houses of Congress, President Barack Obama’s legislative allies pushed through the health law at maximum speed. The Senate rewrote an innocuous, House-passed bill that gave certain tax breaks to homeowners serving in the military. Sissel and his lawyers with Pacific Legal Foundation, a conservative legal group, hoped to upend the health law. They argued its tax penalty impermissibly started in the Senate, not the House.

A three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, though, unanimously ruled that the legislation did not violate the “origination clause.” The appellate judges said the law’s penalty for not having coverage really wasn’t a tax because it wasn’t intended to raise revenue. If the threat of it worked, and people bought policies, there would be no revenue, the judges said. So any tax was “incidental” to the law’s main purpose, they said.

Paxton, though, said the “gut-and-replace approach” used by the Senate threatens an important constitutional provision that makes tax decisions the initial responsibility of House members, who run every two years. Senators run for election every six.

“Today, no less than in 1787, the House should be the legislative body that initiates the power of the purse because it is most connected to the people,” Paxton wrote.

Quoting founder James Madison’s notes from the constitutional convention in Philadelphia, Paxton said that “if the less-accountable Senate could originate tax laws, senators would ‘hatch their mischievous projects, for their own purposes, and have their money bills ready cut & dried, (to use a common phrase) for the meeting of the H. of Rep.’ ”

Paxton said “the Senate is limited to making germane amendments to revenue bills that originated in the House.”

Paxton cited the 2012 opinion of Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts that upheld the Affordable Care Act. Writing for the four other conservative justices, Roberts said the health law exceeded Congress’ power under the Constitution’s commerce clause. But writing for a different, five-member majority, he said it was within Congress’ power to tax.

Paxton said he and his state-level colleagues “are aware of no case that supports construing a statute as a tax to save it from one constitutional attack and as a non-tax to save it from another.”

In a release announcing his brief, Paxton urged the high court to take up Sissel’s appeal.

“Based on the Supreme Court’s own 2012 ruling, Obamacare is a tax on the American people, and since Congress did not follow proper procedure, the law should be struck down in full,” he said.

The attorneys general of Alabama, Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Kansas, South Carolina and West Virginia joined in Paxton’s brief.

According to this Roll Call story about the Cornyn-Cruz brief, the case has broad implications and could affect many other tax-related laws.

Roll Call reported that “the Senate has, as a matter of course, used the ‘shell’ of legislation amending revenue provisions originating in the House, stripped out all of the text, and inserted material that isn’t really related except for doing something about taxes.”