The Brumbies are willing to find a way for Coleman and Speight to get an Olympic experience, but not at the cost of the club’s Super Rugby plans.

ACT Brumbies wingers Henry Speight and Robbie Coleman are considering a temporary switch to sevens rugby in the hope of winning an Olympic Games gold medal.

Coleman’s manager is investigating options for the Queanbeyan junior to be part of Australia’s campaign at the Rio Olympics in 2016 and Speight declared his interest in joining his Brumbies teammate.

One of the biggest stumbling blocks is the ARU’s plan to build a full-time sevens program and wanting players to make a long-term commitment.

The Brumbies are willing to find a way for Coleman and Speight to get an Olympic experience, but not at the cost of the club’s Super Rugby plans.

Advertisement

Superstar Israel Folau has been touted as a possible recruit, while James O’Connor could also make the switch for Olympic gold.

Coleman won a silver medal with the Australian sevens at the 2010 Commonwealth Games and captained the Brumbies to a title at the inaugural club sevens tournament last year.

“Sevens is something I really like and I’d like to consider,” Coleman said. “If the opportunity came up, I’d definitely consider it. Gold is a pretty big lure, it’s already been thrown out there about Sonny Bill Williams for New Zealand.

“I know it’s on the radar, but I’m leaving it with my manager, I’m just enjoying starting with the Brumbies.”

Coleman, who is contracted with the Brumbies until the end of next year, was coached by Australian sevens general manager Anthony Eddy in the under-20s team.

Speight was player of the tournament at the sevens club event in London last year. The Fijian flyer is poised to sign a two-year deal to stay in Canberra. He will become eligible for Australian Test selection in September after a drawn-out battle to play for the Wallabies.

Sevens players have to be citizens if they want to play for Australia at the Olympics.

“I’d be lying if I said I wasn’t interested, it’s definitely very appealing,” Speight said. “The drive for an Olympic gold is up there with my drive to get into the Wallabies and play at a World Cup. I certainly am thinking of it and moving to sevens wouldn’t be a problem, we [the Brumbies] proved that in London next year.”

Speight’s blistering speed coupled with his breakdown work would make him an attractive prospect for sevens.

Outgoing sevens coach Michael O’Connor has made a point to say he wouldn’t parachute Wallabies stars in for the Olympics.

Queanbeyan junior Lewis Holland and Royals star Tom Cusack are part of the sevens set up. The Olympic qualifying campaign starts when the next sevens world series begins in October.

Brumbies coach Stephen Larkham backed Coleman and Speight to make a successful transition and bolster Australia’s medal hopes. But Larkham wants to keep the pair in the Brumbies program to chase Super Rugby glory.

“Robbie Coleman and Henry would be unbelievable at sevens,” Larkham said.

“If it overlaps Super Rugby, we would be against it because our priority is to make this franchise the most successful franchise in Australia again.

“You need all of your good players on the field for that and those guys are two of our best players. But if it was an opportunity to represent their country and maybe win a gold medal at an Olympics, you have to give them that chance.

“If they missed some [Brumbies] training or one game, if it came down to that, we’d probably be all for it.”

Meanwhile, Canberra mechanic Sharni Williams is leading the women’s sevens team in the Amsterdam tournament this weekend. The Australian team is battling with New Zealand to win the world series crown and the Amsterdam event is the last in the campaign.