File Photo (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Every year, more than 1,000 individuals — mostly women and children — reach out to Domestic Violence Intervention of Lebanon County seeking safety, shelter and other services. According to Jennifer Snyder, executive director of DVI, oftentimes these individuals are referred to DVI through other professionals and service providers in the community.

“Knowing that,” explains Snyder, “it is important that we empower other professionals with a skill set that helps them be effective in working with survivors.”

To this end, DVI will facilitate two professional training programs in the coming weeks.

The first program focuses on developing the health care response to intimate partner violence. Three separate one-hour introductory sessions will be held on May 17 at HACC’s Lebanon campus at 7:30 a.m., noon and 5 p.m. Registration is free and can be completed by contacting Mike Ritter at 717-273-7154 or dvipec@dviolc.org or online at www.SurveyMonkey.com/r/KXKS2BJ.

Sessions are open to health care providers in all areas and specialties, plus support staff. Attendees will be introduced to a four-way model of success for implementing system-wide measures to prevent and respond to intimate partner violence. Developed by Kaiser Permanente and Futures Without Violence, this model is consistent with National Consensus Guidelines and with mandates and recommendations under the Affordable Care Act.

“Our goal is a partner network where providers are assessing patients for abuse and making referrals, and we back them up with training, consultation, and support,” says DVI public education coordinator Mike Ritter.

The second program is a three-day Trauma Awareness and Resiliency Institute for Youth Workers. The institute, created by the Boston Area Rape Crisis Center in partnership with the Defending Childhood Initiative, will run June 8, 15 and 22 from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. each day at Elco High School. Registration is free. Interested persons should contact Ritter or dvipec@dviolc.org.

The institute is open to all professionals working with youth in Lebanon County. Over the three days, participants will learn about adolescent development, and trauma and its impacts. Participants will also begin developing a framework of trauma-informed care for their organization.

“We’re excited,” says Ritter. “This is working really well up in Boston. So we think it makes sense as our next step in talking about trauma-informed care here in Lebanon.”

DVI will provide lunch each day. Registrants must attend all three days in order to receive a certificate of completion.

Read or Share this story: http://ldne.ws/1TJWftD