A young cancer patient from the United Kingdom spent several months undergoing treatments here in Oklahoma.

He just finished those treatments and returned home, and while he's not cancer-free yet, he took home quite a souvenir.

During his time here in Oklahoma, Oscar believed a therapy dog, Indy.

11/8/2015 Related Story: UK Boy Finds Pet While Fighting Cancer In OK

“It kind of takes my mind off things,” Oscar told us back in November. “Indy really helps me get through it.”

Oscar said he missed his two dogs back home, Arty and Neala, and was especially heartbroken when Neala passed away from congenital heart condition while he was here in Oklahoma.

“He just gives you that instant, you know, there's life to live,” said Sunshine Bush with OK Save a Dog.

Bush met Oscar at an adoption event in October. A dog lover, Oscar volunteered at the group's events between his treatments at Procure Proton Therapy Center in Oklahoma City.

“He may be feeling just terrible that day and he'd spend time with the dogs and you wouldn't even know that he was hurting,” said Bush.

However, one dog, Alexa, a Boston terrier cross breed caught his eye.

“Oscar would regularly sit beside her and visit with her and take her out for a walk,” said Sarah Hawthorne, Oscar’s mother. “Over time they bonded.”

With each event, dogs were adopted but Alexa always remained in the back of her crate, in hindsight maybe for a reason.

“She would see him and light up and he would see her and just sit there and talk to her and by the end of the time they'd be all feeling better,” said Bush.

After Oscar finished his treatments at Integris Procure this month, he made sure he didn't leave without a piece of Oklahoma with him. He adopted Alexa. Now home in the United Kingdom, Oscar's family says she's already settling in as the newest member of the family.

“You'd never believe she traveled across an ocean to be with him,” Bush said. “She's fitting in so great it was like that is where she was meant to be.”

The family renamed Alexa "Tips" after an English tea. As far as Oscar's treatments, he still has many procedures and possibly surgery ahead to try and remove that tumor, but he'll have his family and dogs there every step of the way.

Click here if you would like to follow Oscar’s journey .