More market-moving news can be found in Money Morning's daily stock market outlook , published by Money Morning Economist, Garret Baldwin.

The White House announced last night that employers with fewer than 100 workers do not need to provide health insurance until 2016 under the Affordable Healthcare Act.

This is now the second delay to this key feature of Obamacare. The Internal Revenue Service announced that companies with more than 100 workers must cover at least 70% of their workforce by the start of next year.

Although this delay may seem unappreciated by those it affects, a tracking poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation shows most people, who are currently uninsured, are hesitant to sign up for Obamacare health insurance plans, anyway.

Obamacare Health Insurance Plans for One America

It's not hard to see how Obamacare failed to win over the uninsured.

Snags like this delay, and the rocky launch of the Obamacare website, where people shop for health insurance plans, have triggered relentless negative publicity.

Problems getting the uninsured on board haven't been the only problem with enrollment in Obamacare. The demographics of those who have signed up have also strayed far from expectations. If this situation doesn't change by the end of the enrollment period March 30, the entire law could be jeopardized… Read more

Join the conversation on Twitter on #Obamacare fails in 2014, and be sure to follow @MoneyMorning.

Tweets about "#obamacare"



Related Articles

First-Ever Obamacare Demographics Are In – And They're Ugly

The first-ever Obamacare demographic statistics were released last week, and they're alarming – but here's how you can be prepared.

Are These Obamacare Changes Unconstitutional?

Eleven state attorneys general are crying foul, calling U.S. President Barack Obama's unilateral Obamacare changes unconstitutional since he is bypassing congressional approval.

Read more stories about Obamacare.

Related Chart

Just How Big Will Your "Obamacare Surprise" Be?…Wait Until You See This Chart

When touting his signature healthcare reform law, the "Affordable Care Act," President Barack Obama promised it would "cut the cost of a typical family's premium by up to $2,500 a year."

Read more…