The Af­ford­able Care Act pro­hib­its in­surers from deny­ing cov­er­age to in­di­vidu­als with preex­ist­ing con­di­tions, but some com­pan­ies may be lim­it­ing their pre­scrip­tion-drug of­fer­ings to steer HIV pa­tients to oth­er plans.

“We’re see­ing policies in place by in­sur­ance com­pan­ies that cer­tainly look like they are in­ten­ded to make plans look less at­tract­ive to pa­tients with HIV,” said John Peller, vice pres­id­ent of policy at AIDS Found­a­tion of Chica­go.

There are two main con­cerns with the policies in ques­tion: that com­pan­ies are not of­fer­ing single-tab­let re­gi­mens (STRs) for HIV pa­tients in their Qual­ity Health Plan for­mu­lar­ies (the list of pre­scrip­tion medi­cines covered), and that there is a lack of trans­par­ency as far as what the plans of­fer to in­di­vidu­als with the dis­ease.

Ad­vocacy groups are ob­serving this across a num­ber of ma­jor in­sur­ance com­pan­ies in a large num­ber of states.

The HIV Health Care Ac­cess Work­ing Group (HH­CAWG), a co­ali­tion of na­tion­al HIV health policy ad­voc­ates, has sent let­ters to in­sur­ance com­pan­ies and to Health and Hu­man Ser­vices Sec­ret­ary Kath­leen Se­beli­us re­gard­ing the is­sue.

“We’re mak­ing sure that for­mu­lar­ies are ro­bust, and [in­sur­ance com­pan­ies] are not util­iz­ing man­age­ment tech­niques — like tier­ing or pri­or ap­prov­al — that cre­ate un­fair or un­due bur­dens on people to meet their stand­ard of care,” says Robert Gre­en­wald, dir­ect­or of the Cen­ter of Health Law and Policy In­nov­a­tion at Har­vard Law School, and a co­chair of HH­CAWG. Gre­en­wald is the main in­di­vidu­al be­hind the ef­fort, and point per­son on the let­ters.

STRs are cru­cial to qual­ity HIV treat­ment, al­low­ing pa­tients to take only one pill a day. STRs “are the most fre­quently taken HIV drugs, and have ab­so­lutely re­vo­lu­tion­ized care for people with HIV,” Peller says. “There is strong evid­ence that shows someone with HIV on a single-tab­let re­gi­men is more likely to stick to their re­gi­men.” Stud­ies show that STRs re­duce hos­pit­al­iz­a­tions by 23 per­cent and over­all med­ic­al costs by 17 per­cent.

“The hope is to call at­ten­tion to this, giv­en that com­pounds are very ef­fect­ive and not more costly than their com­pon­ent parts,” Gre­en­wald says. He says that part of the reas­on com­pan­ies are not of­fer­ing STRs is the way that Cen­ters for Medi­care and Medi­caid Ser­vices guidelines to is­suers are cur­rently writ­ten — dif­fer­ent dosages, con­cen­tra­tions, and de­liv­ery meth­ods of a drug are con­sidered the same if they have the same com­pon­ents.

Ad­voc­ates worry not only that the STRs are not avail­able on some plans, but also that in­form­a­tion re­gard­ing what is avail­able is ex­tremely dif­fi­cult to find.

“Some com­pan­ies post a sub­set of for­mu­lar­ies and not the whole one,” says An­drea Weddle, ex­ec­ut­ive dir­ect­or of the HIV Medi­cine As­so­ci­ation and an­oth­er co­chair of HH­CAWG. “It can be mis­lead­ing and makes it dif­fi­cult for people with more chron­ic con­di­tions to make sure their spe­cif­ic medi­cine is avail­able.” Weddle says in­form­a­tion is highly vari­able from state to state and in­surer to in­surer, in terms of how much trans­par­ency there is in the plans offered.

“I do think we have some con­cerns that [plans] lack trans­par­ency,” Gre­en­wald con­curs. “If people don’t see their med­ic­a­tions, see them only avail­able with cost-shar­ing that is highly-tiered, or oth­er man­age­ment tech­niques to make it dif­fi­cult to ac­cess the care [pa­tients] want — if that is seen hap­pen­ing tar­geted at any con­di­tion — that would be a dis­crim­in­at­ory prac­tice.”

Ad­voc­ates say it is too soon to tell wheth­er these policies are in­ten­ded to steer away HIV pa­tients, and the is­sue falls in­to a bit of a gray area as far as an­ti­discrim­in­a­tion pro­tec­tions in the ACA. HHS reg­u­la­tions al­low plans some flex­ib­il­ity, but they are re­quired to cov­er at least one drug in every class, as well as the num­ber of drugs in the state bench­mark plan.

“If it ap­pears a plan is de­signed, or mar­ket­ing is spe­cific­ally de­signed, to dis­cour­age en­roll­ment, that would rise to the level [of dis­crim­in­a­tion],” Gre­en­wald says. “We’re mon­it­or­ing to make sure that doesn’t hap­pen.”

Gre­en­wald says he has already re­ceived some re­sponses to the let­ter from in­sur­ance com­pan­ies, say­ing they ree­valu­ated their cov­er­age and are now plan­ning to in­clude STRs in their plans.

BlueCross Blue­Shield Well­Point re­spon­ded say­ing it would of­fer At­ri­pla — the first HIV re­gi­men in one daily pill — though Well­Point spokes­wo­man Lori McLaugh­lin says this change was already in the works.

“Well­Point af­fil­i­ated plans will all of­fer At­ri­pla,” she wrote in an email. “However, sim­il­ar to our ap­proach in all drug classes, not all HIV drug com­bin­a­tions will be in­cluded on for­mu­lary, just as all com­bin­a­tions are not offered in oth­er drug classes. In most states, spe­cialty drugs are offered on Tier 3 or Tier 4, which re­quires co-in­sur­ance.”

“It’s great,” Gre­en­wald says of the re­sponses he’s re­ceived thus far. “We’ve iden­ti­fied a prob­lem that could have been very ser­i­ous, and there’s some in­dic­a­tion we may be able to re­solve it by watch­ing closely and hold­ing com­pan­ies ac­count­able.”