Molina Healthcare (MOH) said its ObamaCare exchange membership more than doubled to 630,000 in the first quarter from 266,000 a year ago, but its earnings dived and shares tumbled 18% early Friday.

Management said the customer growth was far more than it expected and acknowledged being overwhelmed by customer gains from Medicaid, exchanges and acquisitions.

In an earnings call, management pointed to those stresses as part of the reason for its setback in controlling customer medical care costs, which rose to 89.8% of premium revenue from 88.7% a year ago. Earnings fell to 43 cents per share from 56 cents a year ago.

But CEO Joseph Molina said the primary reasons for its big earnings miss were “the general failure of Medicaid rates to keep pace with the growing medical care costs,” higher utilization by customers in Texas and Ohio, and higher-than-expected pharmacy costs — especially for high-cost specialty drugs.

Molina’s news appeared to weigh on the entire sector — even among competitors that have reported their own earnings in recent days. Shares of Centene (CNC), another Medicaid managed care company seeing big exchange membership gains, slipped 4%. UnitedHealth (UNH) eased 1.5%; Aetna (AET) 2.3%; and Anthem (ANTM) 2.6%.

The company, whose 4.2 million plan members include 339,000 in Puerto Rico, also highlighted the uncertain risks it faces from the Zika virus.

“While very few of the expectant mothers among our membership have contracted the virus, the full financial effects of Zika will not likely be known for several months,” Molina said.

Molina’s exchange customer base has tended to be relatively low cost, requiring the company to transfer funds to insurers with higher-cost members via ObamaCare’s risk-adjustment program. Updated risk-adjustment estimates were one reason for Molina’s lower premium revenue per member in the first quarter, the company said. Though it’s too early to know much about the new customers, Molina expects that they will tend toward the healthy side based on demographics that are similar to 2015 customers.

Molina didn’t say where its exchange membership surge came, but Texas looks to be one market where it gained market share. Molina now offers the two lowest-cost silver plans in Houston, having displaced Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas and another carrier.