The Supreme Court building is reflected in an anti-abortion protester's sunglasses as he prays during the third and final day of legal arguments over the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act at the Supreme Court in Washington, in this March 28, 2012 file photo. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst/Files

4740962

One particular testimony in a congressional hearing Thursday on Planned Parenthood’s abortion practices could put the organization on its heels, documents obtained by The Daily Caller News Foundation show.

The testimony will come from Sue Thayer, who worked as a center manager for Planned Parenthood for 17 years. According to her prepared statements, she will testify about questionable abortion practices she witnessed and talk about her federal complaint that alleges Planned Parenthood committed Medicaid fraud, used taxpayer money for abortion services, and tricked poor people into donating money.

“No business, certainly no healthcare clinic, should view a woman’s body as a profit center, yet that is exactly what Planned Parenthood does,” reads the statement.

Thayer has teamed up with the Christian legal group Alliance Defending Freedom in federal False Claims Act complaint against Planned Parenthood, alleging that they issue far more pills than necessary in order to get more reimbursements, fraudulently billed the government for abortion services, and coerced donations out of Medicaid patients.

These accusations counter Planned Parenthood’s claims that federal funds are never used for abortions.

“Because I had access to the billing system for the whole affiliate, I also know that Planned Parenthood would bill Medicaid for abortion-related services – ultrasounds, office visits, blood tests, medications, and other services that were part of an abortion,” the testimony reads. “These types of Planned Parenthood Medicaid billings for abortion-related services have also been found by government auditors in New York and Washington.”

Thayer said Planned Parenthood would ask low-income patients to pay for services and pills and then still bill Medicaid for the full amount. Thayer said Planned Parenthood would receive full payment from Medicaid and count the patient’s payment as a voluntary donation.

“I started working at Planned Parenthood believing that I could serve young women and make their lives better,” she says in her testimony. “Over nearly two decades inside Planned Parenthood, I learned that was a lie. Planned Parenthood is more concerned about its bottom line than it is about the health and safety of women.”

Read the full testimony here:

Thayer Testimony

Follow Casey on Twitter and like him on Facebook

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact [email protected].