The state Department of Health sent a statewide advisory about a rare tick-borne disease to doctors and public health officials late yesterday, urging physicians to consider it as a possible cause for patients with viral encephalitis or meningitis.

A 51-year-old Warren County woman died in mid-May of Powassan virus, a tick-borne illness whose most dangerous symptom is encephalitis.

It was New Jersey’s first case of a disease that, while extremely rare, is fatal in 10 percent of the cases. It is carried by the same tick that carries bacteria for Lyme disease — although only 1 percent carry Powassan.

Powassan differs from Lyme disease in another important way: While a tick has to remain attached to a person for at least a day to transmit Lyme, it needs only 15 minutes to spread Powassan.

The state was notified Nov. 11 that a sample sent by the woman’s physician to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was identified as Powassan. It updated its website to include information about the disease.

But it didn’t send the alert out until yesterday.

On Thursday, the health department said it didn’t issue an advisory because the disease is extremely rare and because "it was no longer tick season."

Yesterday, state officials said what they received in mid-November was merely a preliminary report from the CDC. The final report was received yesterday, which triggered the alert to local doctors, said Donna Leusner, a department spokeswoman.

While cases of tick-borne illnesses soar in the summer months, they remain possible year-round, said Tom Mather, a public health entomologist with the TickEncounter Resource Center at the University of Rhode Island.

It remains unclear why six months passed between the woman’s death and any official knowledge about its cause. A spokesman for the CDC said he did not know when tissue samples from the woman’s doctor were received.

Citing privacy concerns, neither the Warren County woman’s name nor her hometown were released. Peter Summers, Warren County’s health officer, said he didn’t hear about the case until November.

Mather predicted once New Jersey doctors know Powassan is a possibility among their patients, the state will see a jump in the number of patients suspected of having the illness.

There have been fewer than 60 cases of Powassan since it was discovered in 1958. However, most of those have been in the last 10 years. This year, there have been eight cases nationally; New Jersey’s is now the ninth.