A sign seen, at the entrance to St Thomas' Hospital, part of the National Health Service. (AP Photo/Alastair Grant) The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act wasn’t the only landmark health care reform implemented in the last few years. In England, legislators transformed the nature of their health care system by passing the Health and Social Care Act 2012, a law that reorganized the NHS, the oldest and largest publicly funded health service in the world. Both sets of reforms aim at bridging the gap between public and private investment, but despite England allowing for greater market-based competition and the United States expanding government-subsidized care, the two approaches share little common ground. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“Something had to be done,” says James Barlow, a professor at the Business School at Imperial College London. “The NHS could not go on providing universal service to the same degree without some radical thinking.” Supporters also claim the law will reign in years of unchecked spending. According to a study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the United Kingdom’s overall health spending increased by 5.7 percent per year between 2000 and 2009. By 2011, it accounted for 9.4 percent of total GDP.