At the outset, I must first state that if I had a magic wand, many things would change about how our government works. It would be, in many ways, unrecognizable.

But since I don’t have a magic wand, I have constructed my thoughts in accordance with the realities of the real world, to the best of my ability.

The problem with many conservatives today who have discovered their passion for the Constitution post-Jan. 20, 2009, is that they read the Constitution in a vacuum. They read it as if 226 years of history have not elapsed and that legal precedents and governing traditions have not been established. In other words, they read it as purists. They imagine all the possibilities of what was once a brand new Constitution, rather than the one that now exists: one that has become the oldest, continuous written Constitution in history. They believe two fundamentally flawed ideas: 1) that the “original intent” of the Founders on a host of public policy issues can not only be discerned with precision, but enacted into practice right away in the 21st century once rediscovered; and 2) that such changes should be made regardless of their effects on society, because that is what “principled” people do.

Ironically, many of those who have been the greatest (self-declared) respecters of the Constitution in the Age of Obama now turn to Trump because he “will get things done.”

Except, that’s not at all how the Constitution works.

Which can only mean one thing: What they ACTUALLY want is a president who behaves exactly like they accuse Obama of behaving, just in the interest of their own ideological preferences.

And, to top it all off, they claim that they are the principled ones.

This isn’t simply a new silly season, folks. It is a manifestation of the exact same cultural corruption these “conservatives” claim to be against, as well as personally immune from, and yet in many ways perfectly exemplify themselves. It it the height of narcissism, tyranny, intolerance, prejudice, ignorance, amoralism and anti-constitutionalism of which they accuse the left.

That’s why I’m glad to see that many conservatives oppose Trump. There is nothing about Trump that is remotely predicated on constitutionalism.

There is another problem with this “purist” approach. It presupposes that returning to such a purist interpretation of the Constitution is possible and can be achieved quite quickly. But this is simply not true. Our people, culture, government and judiciary have grown accustomed to various habits of mind and action – and if you think habits are hard to break on an individual level, then you ought be able to imagine the difficulty of breaking the habits that have lasted decades, or even centuries, of a government that presides over 320 million people.

If you do not appreciate this reality, you are willfully ignorant. Politicians who pretend this can happen should be held to task for such propaganda. The candidates we seek out should hold the Constitution in the greatest esteem, and they should articulate a plan that can lead us to a more genuinely historical and textually justifiable rendering of the Constitution. But they should not deceive us that this can be done quickly.

To assume this will happen overnight, in one presidency, or even two or three, is folly. The precedents that prevent this are not merely judicial, but also legislative and executive, all at various points supported by one political faction or another, including conservatives.

Old habits die hard, and if we don’t accommodate our expectations to what is truly and realistically possible, with a country as diverse and pluralistic as ours at this point in our history, the same will be said of our electoral prospects.

Joshua Charles’ popular new book is now available at the WND Superstore: “Liberty’s Secrets: The Lost Wisdom of America’s Founders”

Media wishing to interview Joshua Charles, please contact media@wnd.com.