COLORADO SPRINGS — A group seeking to oust embattled El Paso County Sheriff Terry Maketa from office gained approval for a petition to seek his recall Friday.

The group now must gather more than 44,387 signatures by July 12 to recall Maketa, who sheriff’s office employees say had sex with subordinates, promoted those he had extramarital affairs with and mismanaged office funds.

Ryan Parsell, a spokesman for the El Paso County clerk and recorder, said the signatures, which represent 25 percent of the total votes cast during the last election for sheriff, must be verified. The recall petition was submitted by Randy Stagner, Francis O. McCargar and Jimmy McCargar, according to Parsell.

Francis McCargar worked at the sheriff’s office for more than 19 years, serving as a lieutenant where he oversaw Maketa when he was a deputy.

“I’m going to definitely get out there and get some petitions signed,” McCargar said. “I believe that the people of El Paso County deserve better than that for sheriff.”

Maketa, who is term-limited, has roughly seven months left in his term.

Efforts to reach the sheriff were unsuccessful.

The petition comes a day after Maketa’s wife, who has stayed out of the public eye since the scandal erupted, rallied with other supporters, holding a sign that read “Citizens for Terry.”

Vicki Maketa, who has been married to the sheriff nearly 28 years, gathered with supporters, including the sheriff’s brother, in front of the sheriff’s office for the rally. Tiffany Huntz, a sheriff’s office dispatch employee who is accused of having an affair with the sheriff, came out of the office and gave his wife a hug.

Although Vicki Maketa spoke to other media, she refused to speak to The Gazette, which reported the original story about the allegations, saying, “You’d better get away from me.”

The Facebook page “Citizens for Sheriff Terry Maketa,” launched less than a week ago, has a June 7 post attributed to Vicki Maketa, in which she said her husband “made a terrible mistake during a rough patch in our marriage 5 years ago.” It was during that time text messages from Maketa suggest he was having sex with a woman he promoted.

David Philipps of The Gazette contributed to this report.