By

Well that was probably the least elegant way for the GOP to choose a nominee, but at least it's done. No, Donald Trump did not fare well in Wisconsin, but yep. He da man.

I will not tell a lie. It's a tough decision to cozy up to for me. I liked Trump's initial foray in to the political world. His bold statements were intoxicating. But then his narrative became confusing as it changed constantly. Then it became downright frightening. There's no telling which Trump we see by the convention in July.

(BTW a friend of mine thinks the conventions should be pay per view in order to fund the parties. Not a bad idea.)

I am in a really pleasant place for my POTUS vote this year: it doesn't really matter if I vote at all. While I'm keeping a house (or two) in Wisconsin, my vote by November comes from Texas. I could vote for Donald Duck and Donald Trump will still win there. After 20 years of fighting for the right to see the GOP emerge in Wisconsin, it's a very odd feeling to know that my time would be better spent painting my toenails than engaging in political discussion.

Still, one just doesn't turn off politics after so many years. And lately I've been considering the very real possibility that I won't mind Hillary Clinton as President. 1) Get the first woman POTUS thing out of the way. 2) Divided government is my favorite government. As long as either the House or the Senate stays GOP, there's enough of a barrier to bad decisions. And 3) I'm still not sure I want Trump to succeed labeled as GOP. It would have been so much nicer if he'd messed up someone else's party.

It's probably my penchant for divided government that wins of the three statements above. The last full D/D/D we had smacked America with the Affordable Care Act, which has turned out to be anything but affordable. My roaming oldest spent some time in a bioengineering tank a few weeks ago. He says the new buzz is that the industry shot itself in the foot by supporting the D/D/D initiatives, as it was the politicians and cronies who were rewarded, and not healthcare innovation.

(Geez. Never saw that one coming, huh?)

And so, for America's sake, don't give any one party the keys to America. Historically they bumble it up in a big way. And we don't want that, now, do we?

Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.