Gov. Andrew Cuomo insults the legacy of his late father, liberal icon Mario Cuomo, by claiming that businesses paying the minimum wage “steal’’ $2 billion from taxpayers because their workers can get government subsidies, according to one of the state’s best-known fiscal analysts.

Empire Center for Public Policy President E.J. McMahon, a Manhattan Institute senior fellow and former SUNY vice chancellor, said low-paid workers are, in fact, using the very same “safety-net’’ programs like the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) that Mario Cuomo — and President Bill Clinton — once championed.

The current Gov. Cuomo, conducting an aggressive, union-backed crusade in his father’s name for a mandatory $15-an-hour minimum wage, unleashed a jaw-dropping attack on a portion of the private sector last week by claiming low-wage businesses are “stealing from the taxpayers of this state’’ because their workers are entitled to state and federal benefits.

Cuomo, who is competing with Mayor Bill de Blasio for the title of New York’s leading “progressive,’’ also called the long-standing state policy of providing assistance to the working poor “the mother of all loopholes’’ and a “scam.’’

He claimed that $2 billion in unjustified government subsidies were flowing to low-income workers, contending, “Raise the minimum wage, and I’d rather take that $2 billion and do a tax cut for the people of the state.’’

The trouble for Cuomo, according to McMahon, is that the “scam’’ of the government helping low-income workers was long championed by his father, as well as a generation of Democratic and Republican political leaders.

“The largest direct cash benefit in a typical low-income worker’s public-assistance package is the Earned Income Tax Credit — pioneered in New York state by the late former Gov. Mario Cuomo,’’ noted McMahon, whose conservative-oriented think tank has at times praised the current governor.

“The logical implication of Cuomo’s claim is that programs such as the EITC and food stamps for working people should be sharply curtailed, if not repealed.

“His rhetoric also implies that New York should roll back benefits made available to working families . . . subsidized by the Medicaid expansion under President Obama’s federal Affordable Care Act,’’ McMahon continued.

McMahon also noted that Mario Cuomo had once described Bill Clinton’s role in expanding the EITC for the working poor as one of the former president’s most important accomplishments.

And he also cited a Mario Cuomo budget address in which the then-governor strongly supported the Earned Income Tax Credit as a way to “enhance work incentives for poor families.’’

Meanwhile, McMahon suggested that if Andrew Cuomo wanted to target business tax giveaways, he should look at his own programs, “such as the $420 million a year the state doles out to wealthy film and TV producers, or the state’s $750 million speculative investment in billionaire Elon Musk’s solar-panel factory in Buffalo, or the 100 percent tax exemptions that will flow to the handpicked corporate occupants of the ‘Start-Up NY’ zones.’’

An Empire Center analysis released earlier this month predicted that a $15-an-hour minimum wage — a nearly 70 percent hike over the current minimum — would cost New York at least 200,000 jobs, and perhaps as many as 588,800.

Former Republican US Sen. Alfonse D’Amato’s support of badly trailing Ohio Gov. John Kasich for president may be wavering — or at least, he’s rapidly warming to the candidacy of US Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida.

“I think a Kasich/Rubio ticket would be great but I also think a Rubio/Kasich would be great too,’’ D’Amato told The Post.

“I think either one would give the Republicans the best chance to win,’’ he said.

Cuomo’s hapless state Senate candidate in the Binghamton-area special election earlier this month not only suffered a humiliating defeat but cost one of the state’s most respected district attorneys his job as well.

While Republican Fred Akshar’s crushing defeat of Barbara Fiala, Cuomo’s handpicked candidate and his former motor vehicles commissioner, was widely reported, less well known is the defeat of 28-year Broome County DA Gerald Mollen, a Democrat who headed the state District Attorneys Association.

“Akshar’s 80-20 percent win gave us the boost we needed to help get us over the top’’ in the DA’s race, crowed Broome County GOP Chairman Bijoy Datta.

A bitter Democratic activist involved in the campaign said, “Thanks to Cuomo, who did nothing to help Fiala, Mollen lost his job as well.

“Mollen was collateral damage from Fiala’s defeat and it’s all Cuomo’s fault, since he picked Fiala and then did nothing to help her in the campaign,’’ the activist continued.

Broome County Board of Elections figures show Republican Stephen Cornwell beat Mollen by just over 500 votes.