Some Inglewood residents who continue to lobby a railway giant for some peaceful shut-eye have now turned their efforts to social media.

An advertisement in the February edition of the Inglewood Community Newsletter and a post on the community association’s website encourages those kept awake by noise from Canadian Pacific’s (CP) nearby Alyth rail yard to tweet using the hashtag #ShameOnYouCPrail.

Last summer, the Canadian Transportation Agency ordered CP to stop locomotive testing and repair work at the yard between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m.

But some residents say they’re still not getting a good night’s sleep due to noise from the yard.

“I have gone through multiple pair of ear plugs — that hasn’t helped,” said Inglewood resident Jack Adamson, who lives about three blocks from the site.

“I’m wondering how kids are getting any sleep.

“We’re just letting the world know we’ve had enough.”

Coun. Gian-Carlo Carra said though he considers himself to be in a diplomatic role between the community and the company, he’s proud of the citizens for standing up for themselves.

“I think they have every right to do so,” he said.

“They are continuing their incredibly successful campaign and keeping the pressure on.”

Ed Greenberg with CP said the company has followed the order to cease locomotive testing and repair work between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m.

However, he said, other operations — such assembling trains and moving cars — are not prohibited and that work continues 24/7.

“CP is continually compliant in following the directive,” he said.

“(It) did not cover other normal rail yard operations.”

The company announced in September it plans to relocate its Locomotive Reliability Centre, but a timeline has not been confirmed.

Until then, and even after the centre for fixing and testing equipment is moved, the Alyth rail yard will continue to function, said Greenberg.

“Alyth will continue to be a fully operational, 24/7 rail yard as it always has been,” he said, adding CP is working with Carra on how the yard and the community can co-exist peacefully.

“In fairness to residents, we will look at any questions or enquiries that are raised about Alyth.”

jenna.mcmurray@sunmedia.ca

On Twitter: @SunJMac