Envision this scenario: The year is 2020 and you’re about to stand up and thank your team for a job well done. In the past five years your revenues have increased an average of 10 percent per year, in spite of some difficult economic hurdles.

Your business is financially efficient and extremely profitable. You have a happy team of employees that manage the business with little oversight. You have accumulated considerable business and personal cash reserves. As you reflect on the successes of your recent past, you marvel at how much your business has changed — all for the better.

For this to happen, your business must continually change, adapt and improve its efficiencies to build value. A culture of continuous performance improvement creates more profit now and more wealth in the future. When building a better business, and improving profit and wealth is your goal, measuring performance is your starting point.

Measure what’s important: Determine the key benchmarks and drivers of success.

Determine the key benchmarks and drivers of success. Understand what your numbers say about your business: Ask in which areas you could improve.

Ask in which areas you could improve. Get it done: Identify actions and create targets and accountabilities that lift business performance.

There are many things that you can measure in your business. Faced with so many possible metrics, it can be challenging to identify which are most important. Start by monitoring metrics that help you focus on the activities that produce the results you’re after.

At Profit Soup, we have a recipe for performance improvement that begins with measuring the ingredients that add value to your rental store. Improving productivity, profitability and cash flow improves your financial condition and raises your business’ value. That’s why every business should select some metrics that give them objective feedback, helping them answer these questions:

How productive are you? Do you manage your resources as well as you should? Rental equipment utilization metrics — aggregated for all rental equipment, by category or by specific rental item — assess how efficiently you manage your rental equipment, a critically important resource. Your employees are an equally important resource, so managing staff productivity is a must. On average how much revenue is generated per full-time equivalent employee? What is your average cost per employee? How much of each revenue dollar is spent on payroll and other personnel-related costs?

Do you manage your resources as well as you should? Rental equipment utilization metrics — aggregated for all rental equipment, by category or by specific rental item — assess how efficiently you manage your rental equipment, a critically important resource. Your employees are an equally important resource, so managing staff productivity is a must. On average how much revenue is generated per full-time equivalent employee? What is your average cost per employee? How much of each revenue dollar is spent on payroll and other personnel-related costs? How much profit are you earning? When assessing profitability of a rental company, it is important to assess the costs directly associated with providing goods and services separately from overhead. Direct costs include rental equipment depreciation, lease payments, replacements, repairs, maintenance, sub rentals, setup and delivery vehicle costs, fuel and supplies for rental equipment, and cost of goods for resale. Overheads include selling and general and administration costs. These should be categorized between payroll and

non-payroll related costs. Measure them both in dollar terms and as a percent of total revenue. It also is advisable to monitor your net profit — bottom line — before and after charges for owner compensation.

When assessing profitability of a rental company, it is important to assess the costs directly associated with providing goods and services separately from overhead. Direct costs include rental equipment depreciation, lease payments, replacements, repairs, maintenance, sub rentals, setup and delivery vehicle costs, fuel and supplies for rental equipment, and cost of goods for resale. Overheads include selling and general and administration costs. These should be categorized between payroll and non-payroll related costs. Measure them both in dollar terms and as a percent of total revenue. It also is advisable to monitor your net profit — bottom line — before and after charges for owner compensation. How well do you produce and manage cash? Consider ratios that measure how well you utilize rental equipment, turn resale inventory, manage the lag between service and invoicing and how quickly you collect accounts receivable as well as metrics that indicate whether you have been paying lenders and suppliers on time.

Consider ratios that measure how well you utilize rental equipment, turn resale inventory, manage the lag between service and invoicing and how quickly you collect accounts receivable as well as metrics that indicate whether you have been paying lenders and suppliers on time. How financially strong are you? Consider ratios that measure your levels of debt, such as equity invested by owners compared with money borrowed from creditors. Asset efficiency — sales to assets — and return on investment also are indicators of the strength of your financial position.

Once you have calculated your metrics, the obvious question becomes, “Is my number good, bad or terrible?” This is where benchmarking comes into play.

A benchmark is a point of reference from which measurements of any sort can be made. Benchmarking your business is the process of comparing your figures to the numbers you’d like to achieve. Here are some ways you can establish benchmarks for your business:

Review your past performance: To get a sense for trend, look at a minimum of three years’ history — up to five years if it’s relevant. You can use your “best” year as your past performance benchmark.

To get a sense for trend, look at a minimum of three years’ history — up to five years if it’s relevant. You can use your “best” year as your past performance benchmark. Compare actual results to budget, target or goals: When you compare actual to budgets or targets you’re benchmarking against where you want to be. You can then investigate the difference or variances from what you planned and refocus your actions as needed.

When you compare actual to budgets or targets you’re benchmarking against where you want to be. You can then investigate the difference or variances from what you planned and refocus your actions as needed. Look at industry averages: Industry benchmarks can be useful to assess how you stack up compared to your competition or to other businesses that are similar to yours.

The Cost of Doing Business Report, published bi-annually by the American Rental Association (ARA), is the “go to” source for equipment rental industry financial benchmarks. The 2015 study is underway. If you haven’t yet submitted your information, you can still get on board, as the deadline for participation has been extended to May 31. For more details, go to the “Business Resources” section at ararental.org and select “Cost of Doing Business Report.” There is absolutely no good reason to miss out on this important membership benefit.

By measuring the key financial indicators of business health, the Cost of Doing Business Report suggests targets for critical performance metrics for rental stores in the areas of productivity, profitability, cash flow and financial position. It is one of the best resources for relevant industry benchmarks and also spells out how each ratio is calculated and interpreted. It puts a significant competitive advantage into the hands of ARA members who participate in the study.

The report includes a comprehensive array of financial and operational metrics for three types of rental companies: construction and industrial, general tool, and party and event rental.

These profiles based on companies like yours establish a vision of what you can achieve and provide perspective on the quality of your operation.

Benchmarking can have an impact far beyond the accounting department. With proper commitment, communication and leadership, it possesses the potential to reform all the levels of the company, modify processes, reveal flaws in what were previously considered inherent truths and confirm improvements achieved.

Used strategically, benchmarking can transform not only the business, but the product or service itself, the corporate culture and the attitudes of employees.

Now back to your vision for 2020: You’re about to stand up and thank your team for a job well done. As you reflect on where you’ve been, you say to yourself, “Everything changed when we really embraced managing by the numbers, setting stretch goals with rewards and accountability, and being clear with the entire team about our financial expectations.”

Barbara Nuss is the founder and president of Profit Soup, Seattle. She combines the management and teaching skills of a seasoned business advisor with the technical knowledge of a CPA. Nuss has authored financial benchmark studies in numerous industries and is the author of the ARA Profitability Online Training Program. She is a business coach and frequent facilitator for industry peer group meetings as well as a frequent presenter at The Rental Show.