U.S. Rep. David Jolly's decision to run for U.S. Senate offers Florida Republicans a pragmatic conservative who has ably served his Pinellas constituents in his short time in public office. He knows Tampa Bay and he knows Washington, and he should elevate the level of political debate as the race plays out to succeed Sen. Marco Rubio. While he lacks statewide name recognition, Jolly has a firm grasp of federal issues and has demonstrated that his even-tempered approach to governing can attract swing voters in a competitive election.

Jolly told the Tampa Bay Times editorial board Monday he intends to run on his record, which sounds odd since he took office just 16 months ago after winning a special election to succeed the late C.W. Bill Young. But Jolly worked for Young for nearly two decades before spending time as a lobbyist, and that experience paid off for the new House member who was appointed this year to the powerful Appropriations Committee. His quick rise contrasts sharply with the blank slate of another Republican Senate candidate, Lt. Gov. Carlos Lopez-Cantera, a nonfactor in Gov. Rick Scott's administration whose strongest attribute appears to be his friendship with Rubio.

In his short time in office, Jolly can point to a number of accomplishments. He secured money in House appropriations bills for MacDill Air Force Base and Moffitt Cancer Center in Tampa, and for beach renourishment and homeless programs in Pinellas. He successfully pushed legislation to protect U.S. naval facilities in Cuba and Florida beaches from oil drilling. He also has continued the strong commitment to constituent services that was so important to Young.

Jolly has demonstrated that he is more interested in governing than in scoring political points. He joined his Republican colleagues in trying to reverse President Barack Obama's executive orders on immigration, but when that failed he was one of 75 Republicans who joined Democrats to vote for a funding bill to keep the Department of Homeland Security operating. While he supported repealing the Affordable Care Act, he also introduced legislation to repeal the individual mandate for health insurance and said Florida should have found a way to accept federal Medicaid expansion money. Jolly also has co-sponsored legislation with Democrats on issues ranging from the hiring of military veterans to funding for the Everglades restoration to extending the ban on oil drilling in the eastern Gulf of Mexico through 2027.

That hardly makes Jolly a liberal, as some conservative groups predictably mislabeled him after his announcement. The Times editorial board has had significant policy disagreements with the Indian Shores Republican, from his opposition to the Affordable Care Act to his vote against a bipartisan Medicare bill that put the program on more solid ground. He has consistently opposed Obama's foreign policy, from the reopening of the Cuba and U.S. embassies to fast-track legislation for the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement to his likely opposition to the multilateral nuclear arms agreement with Iran. But Jolly is a diligent lawmaker who takes an intellectual approach to public policy, and he prefers researching issues before taking a position rather than talking first and reading the details later.

For Florida voters, this should be a competitive Senate race that has yet to attract candidates who have previously run statewide. For most Pinellas voters, Jolly's decision means they will elect their third different House member in four years. Young admirably served the area for more than four decades before his death in 2013, and Jolly will have served less than two full terms. Former Gov. Charlie Crist signaled his intentions on Monday to run as a Democrat for the House seat, and the district should become even more competitive between Democrats and Republicans when the Legislature redraws the lines next month as ordered by the Florida Supreme Court.

In both races, voters should be looking for candidates from either political party who are more interested in governing and building consensus than in partisanship and creating more gridlock in Washington.