U.S. Rep. Carol Shea-Porter and Republican challenger Frank Guinta have squared off three times, and their familiarity was on display during a debate Monday night.

Click here to view News 9’s report.

The two met at St. Anselm College in the Granite State Debate, sponsored by WMUR and the New Hampshire Union-Leader.

Watch videos of the full debate.

Each candidate stuck to a theme, with Guinta disparaging Shea-Porter's time in office and linking her to an unpopular president, while Shea-Porter cast Guinta as a tea party conservative and criticized his past votes.

Many times throughout the debate, Guinta referred to Shea-Porter's six years in office, but he didn't often mention the two years he spent in Congress within the past six years. Shea-Porter won the seat in 2006 and lost it to Guinta in 2010. She regained the seat in 2012.

Shea-Porter said her proudest legislative moment in Congress was the passage of the Affordable Care Act. She said it has solved many problems with the health care system.

"This is a remarkable piece of legislation that still needs improvement, and we know that," she said. "Unfortunately, since the current House has voted 56 times to cancel it, we haven't been able to do the fixes."

Guinta said the Affordable Care Act is nothing to be proud of.

"I'm a little surprised that Congresswoman Shea-Porter is most proud of a piece of legislation that 65 percent of New Hampshire residents oppose," Guinta said.

Shea-Porter said limitations that Granite Staters faced are easing. She said five insurance companies will be available in January, but Guinta challenged how available they actually will be.

"We've been promised that this is going to work, but who knows how many carriers are actually going to come to the state?" he said.

Early in the debate, the candidates were asked about what the government should do about Ebola. Guinta said the response so far has shown a failure in leadership.

"We need an immediate travel ban," Guinta said. "I don’t know why the president refuses to institute a travel ban."

Shea-Porter said that after some initial missteps, she believes the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health have responded well.

"I also believe it was a really bad idea to cut the funding for the CDC and NIH and not to have a surgeon general, which I would put in Frank Guinta's lap because they voted to cut those," Shea-Porter said.

View photos from the debate.

Both agreed that in the fight against ISIS, they don't want to see boots on the ground. Shea-Porter said the situation in the region is so complex and changing that it would be too dangerous for troops.

"The allegiances and the alliances change daily, so we would be putting our men and women at risk because they just simply would not be able to ascertain who is friend and who is foe," she said.

Guinta criticized President Barack Obama's handling of the situation, saying it shows a lack of leadership.

"What we need is a clear identified strategy from the president of the United States," Guinta said. "At that point, we then should require ... an up or down vote on whether we are going to war."

The candidates are locked in a tight race. A WMUR Granite State Poll released Monday shows Shea-Porter leading Guinta by 4 points, 44-40 percent. Her lead is within the poll's margin of sampling error of plus or minus 6.1 percentage points.