By Alina Tugend

For Lisa Freemantle, a 53-year-old former teacher, reflexology seemed like the perfect second career.

She credits reflexology, the ancient practice of using pressure points in the body to relieve health problems, with easing her migraine headaches.

So it was with great enthusiasm that she undertook more than 200 hours of training and opened a practice near her Westchester County, New York, home 10 years ago. She has a steady stream of clients and earns as much as she did as a substitute teacher.

But increasingly, reflexologists are finding their businesses under pressure.

On one side is the rising number of storefront foot spas that offer what they call reflexology for sometimes as little as $25 an hour, which can be a quarter of the cost of a trained reflexologist. Some of these spas have been found to be fronts for human trafficking. On the other side are complicated state laws. In New York, Florida, Hawaii and a number of other states, anyone who wants to practice reflexology must be licensed as a trained massage therapist. While both reflexology and massage can reduce anxiety or stress, massage therapy is aimed at soothing or healing the specific part of the body being touched. Reflexology involves applying pressure to parts of the body, usually the feet, hands or outer ears, that correspond to internal organs and systems, like the digestive or circulatory system.

Research by the National Cancer Institute has shown that reflexology may benefit cancer patients by reducing shortness of breath, a common symptom of breast cancer patients. Another study found it could reduce preoperative anxiety.

The Reflexology Association of America has 645 individual members, a number that has grown every year since the organization started in 1995, said president Brenda Makowsky.

To be certified in foot reflexology by the American Reflexology Certification Board, Freemantle passed a 300-question written exam covering anatomy, physiology and ethical business practices, and saw 30 clients for three sessions each for at least 45 minutes. Requiring her to learn massage therapy to do reflexology “would be like making me learn to drive a truck because I want to drive a car,” she said.

Sorting out the laws can be complicated. According to the American Massage Therapy Association, 45 states have massage therapy laws and only nine offer exemptions for reflexologists.

The confusing licensing situations have led to the growth of storefront businesses that offer reflexology for $25 to $30 an hour. Christine Issel, a co-founder of the American Reflexology Certification Board, says in most cases the reflexology offered at these places amounts to little more than foot massages.