We re-introduce you to those eleven volunteers Deana Day recognized each month of 2014. They are people who made a big difference in the lives of so many.

Carolyn Salley of Meridian started our year off right by sharing her heart, and the love of God with inmates. The Good News Prison Ministry volunteer says serving the jail population is just as much a gift to herself.

"On the way home, I'm just filled with joy," said Salley.

In Philadelphia, Sandi Lewis is doing more than her share to reach women in jail. Lewis volunteers in a ministry there to help those released get back on their feet, find a job, and a new life.

"We want them to know the word of go, because we think that strengthens their lives," said Lewis.

When the weather got bitterly cold, a local pastor answered the call to bring the homeless into the warmth and feed them. Gary Morris of Life Church in Meridian says he was called to action-- and with the help of lots of volunteers and community members, reached out to Meridian's homeless population.

"We had people that we brought from the dumpsters, from behind bars, under bridges, ditches," said Morris.

Then we caught up with Sam Davis in Clarke County, who has a smile and a handshake for everyone, and the skills to build wheelchair ramps-- a job that has changed many lives.

"Jesus tried to help people in his ministry, and we are just following his example," said Davis.

Then we sat down with a Meridian woman who is a certified nurse midwife. But in between delivering babies, she makes it her mission to empower other women to get healthy and fit.

"Women, when we take care of ourselves, we can, in turn, take care of our families," said Brown.

Gloria Williams was a school counselor for many years, but once she retired, put on her volunteer hat to work tirelessly for the Boys and Girls Club.

"You can't live in the world by yourself. You have to have other people to be successful," said Williams.

Reverend Vicki Gladding may be the quietest of our 2014 honorees, shying away from the spotlight, but she has found her gift of serving others comes in comforting the sick as a volunteer chaplain at Rush Hospital.

"So whatever it is, when I'm praying with people, or meeting their needs, just spiritually, or seeing them grow in the faith," said Gladding.

Frank Buckley of Enterprise beat cancer not once, but twice. It's that fearless spirit that keeps him volunteering to fight fires, and to be ready in a split second.

"You get a call in the middle of the night in January, you try to make sure you've got your coat when you go out the door," said Buckley.

When folks in Union think of a community servant, it's Marion Whinery they have in mind. His friends say he puts serving his community ahead of his own needs.

"Until somebody throws me out, I'm planning on being here in my community working. Yes sir," said Whinery.

Linda Bruister of Meridian shares her sunny personality and can-do attitude with a number of organizations, but it was her personal battle with diabetes that inspired her to help others with the disease.

"I just have a heart for it. I think we're all called to be of service," said Bruister.

And a local pastor wrapped up a wonderful year for us by feeding the hungry. Reverend Samuel Merriweather says he once knew what need feels like, what trouble feels like, and hopes to help those in a difficult place in life.

"So everybody that passed by, I let them come in and get a free Thanksgiving dinner. From that day on, every Thanksgiving, every Christmas, I'm running," said Merriweather.

Need knows no season. And neither do these volunteers--they give back year-round. We honor them for inspiring us in 2014.

If you would like to nominate someone for our Eleven Who Care, you can fill out a nomination here at WTOK or you can fill one out here on www.wtok.com.