18 Flares Filament.io 18 Flares ×

Louie Gohmert shared some rather strange views concerning the recent judges that have ruled in favor of marriage equality in cases brought up challenging several state's marriage bans, most recently in Oklahoma. Gohmert spoke as part of the monthly event, “Conversations with Conservatives,” hosted by the Heritage Foundation.

As a fervent opponent of marriage equality (and reason, logic, among other things), Gohmert believes these judges have simply been abusing their power and their interpretation of the law.

Michele Bachmann was also there to share her views on marriage equality.

Read more about their remarks below the jump.“For one omnipotent, omniscious, ubiquitous federal judge who is wise beyond his education to say – to make such a declaration about the law, I think, requires revisiting by each state and compliance with the U.S. Supreme Court,” Gohmert argued.

According to Gohmert, these judges seem to share the attitude of “basically, we haven't seen any biological evidence to support marriage being between a man and a woman.” Gohmert's advice for pro-equality judges? “They need some basic plumbing lessons.”

Because of course: Marriage has little to do with love, and absolutely everything to do with which body parts go where.





Gohmert and Bachmann previously teamed up in a bizarre press conference in Egypt

Not letting herself be outdone by Gohmert's strange “plumbing” references, Michele Bachmann took the opportunity to blame marriage equality on President Obama for refusing to defend the Defense of Marriage Act in courts, and then took a shot at Obamacare, simply because. “The legacy of Barack Obama will be of the establishment of lawlessness in the United States,” argued Bachmann.

Bachmann also summoned the problems going on in Egypt by associating President Obama and the judges ruling in favor of marriage equality to the ousted Egyptian president, Mohammed Morsi. Bachmann argued President Obama and the pro-equality judges are acting just like Morsi, “who all of the sudden declared that his edicts were not appealable to a court.”

Morsi was ousted by the Egyptian armed forces last year, and is facing trial on charges of inciting murder. A very far off comparison to those fighting for the Constitutional rights of LGBT folks to be recognized.

Gohmert previously made comments regarding gay marriage after the Supreme Court's DOMA ruling last summer, stating marriage equality signals the collapse of civilization, as gay marriage goes against “the laws of nature and nature's God.”

Note to Gohmert: Gay marriage has been legal in Massachusetts since 2004, for almost an entire decade. The world did not end.