Randy Thompson Photography/ for The Savannah Morning News. Dr. Bob Johnson checks the election results over the shoulders of supporters Joanne and Ed Shapoff.

Randy Thompson Photography/ for The Savannah Morning News. Dr. Bob Johnson and Dr. John Odum chat as they await the results of Tuesday's election at Dr. johnson's campaign headquarters.

Randy Thompson Photography/ for The Savannah Morning News. Dr. Bob Johnson shares a moment with Pearl Balcom, who was his nurse for 13 years, as they await Tuesday's election returns to come in.

Randy Thompson Photography/ for The Savannah Morning News. Dr. Bob Johnson chats with supporters Marsha and Earl Shadley at his campaign headquarters as they await the results of Tuesday's election.

Randy Thompson Photography/ for The Savannah Morning News. Campaign supporters Ed Shapoff and Pat Zorx check the election results with candidate Dr. Bob Johnson.

Brittney Lohmiller / Savannah Morning News - Zellie Duvall, volunteer for candidate for the 1st Congressional District of Georgia Buddy Carter, labels a whiteboard with county names to tallie votes as they come in at the Hyatt Regency in Savannah. Carter is running against Dr. Bob Johnson for Jack Kingston's seat in the House of Representatives.

Brittney Lohmiller / Savannah Morning News - From left, Campaign Manager Lee Hughes, candidate for the 1st Congressional District of Georgia Buddy Carter, Public Relations Manager Jud Seymour and Field Director Phillip Fordham watch the absentee vote tallies come in at the Hyatt Regency in Savannah. Carter is running against Dr. Bob Johnson to replace Congressman Jack Kingston.

From left, J.T. Carter, father of Buddy Carter, Buddy Carter, candidate for the 1st Congressional District of Georgia, and Gloria Sears (not pictured) talk at the Hyatt Regency in Savannah while waiting for the votes to be tallied.

Pooler state Sen. Buddy Carter grasped victory Tuesday night in a bitterly contested Republican runoff for the 1st Congressional District.

Carter won 53 percent of the votes, while his opponent, Bob Johnson, garnered 46 percent.

Johnson, a surgeon from Isle of Hope, ran as a political outsider in support of term limits and firmly against the Affordable Care Act also known as Obamacare. His success came from the lower half of the district in Glynn and Camden counties and a few small counties.

Johnson claimed he was supported by about 85 percent of local tea party members and virtually all tea partiers nationally, including former vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin, who lent her support after a last-minute “gentle probe.” The Club for Growth, FreedomWorks and a few other conservative groups backed him also.

But behind Carter were key mainline conservatives, including many area mayors and sheriffs, and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. He also positioned himself closely to the Republican incumbent, Jack Kingston, a longtime Savannah congressman running in a closely watched U.S. Senate primary runoff.

The Republican nominee is heavily favored against Democratic nominee Brian Reese of Savannah in the Nov. 4 general election.

Carter, the primary’s top vote-getter, ran in favor of tax reform, reining in the national debt, balancing the budget, repealing Obamacare, and protecting gun rights – picking up a National Rifle Association endorsement.

He said he felt most confident of his popularity in his state Senate district, western counties and some areas down south where he was banking on endorsements from such people as a third place primary rival to pay electoral dividends.

The mood early Tuesday night at the Hyatt Regency Savannah room overlooking the Savannah River was relaxed as Carter supporters streamed in and chatted over drinks and appetizers. But behind the scenes the candidate and his aides were anxiously crunching the numbers.

“It’s all going to come down to Chatham County,” said communications director Jud Seymour. Shortly before 10 p.m., Chatham County reported that Carter had 60 percent of the votes and the race was essentially won.

A fixture for many years in regional politics with family owned pharmacies in the district, Carter was most certainly helped in Chatham, Effingham and other nearby counties by his eight years in the Georgia General Assembly. Since the late 1980s he has been involved in municipal affairs in rapidly growing Pooler, where he was a two-term mayor.

“Look where we’re sitting in Pooler; look around,” he said during lunch at Cheddar’s just off Pooler Parkway, where the fervent construction of stores and restaurants seems unending.

“This didn’t happen by chance. This took a lot of work, a lot of planning on behalf of a lot of people and I was one of the ones responsible for that.”

Both candidates traversed the 17-county coastal district in the final days leading up to Tuesday’s runoff. And both men spent Tuesday morning, without coat and tie, making 11th-hour appeals to voters in eateries and on street corners.

Johnson, who described his first campaign experience as “exhilarating,” was cheerful talking to folks over their morning cups of coffee and buttery layers of pancakes at The Original Pancake House on Hodgson Memorial Drive in Savannah.

It was a distinct contrast to the fierce attack ads and messages that were delivered frequently from the perch of his campaign. Critics charged him and Carter with overseeing exceptionally negative campaigns, even for this day and social media age.

Johnson, an Army veteran who has undertaken medical mission trips, said he made an effort to be positive when he and his supporters knocked on an estimated 12,000 doors and initiated roughly 115,000 calls during the campaign. Still, he stood by his attacks on his opponent that often included words like “liberal” and “professional politician.”

“Does it bother me?” Johnson asked of the race’s tone. “This isn’t patty-cake. We’ve both invested huge amounts of our money in this race, so this is a very serious business.”

While Carter said he disliked the amount of outside money that made its way into the race, he and Johnson raised well more than a combined $1 million and personally contributed what’s considered large sums for a congressional race —$300,000 and $224,000, respectively — toward their campaigns.

THE VOTE

Buddy Carter: 53 percent

Bob Johnson: 46 percent