BLUFFTON, S.C. (WJCL) - The Lowcountry’s latest town hall featured presidential hopeful Senator Ted Cruz. The Texas lawmaker stopped by Sun City in Bluffton to address residents there about a variety of issues.

Hundreds of Sun City residents came to the Pavilion on Monday morningTo hear what the senator had to say. He says his main order of business is to rescind what he says are "unconstitutional actions" already in place. Senator Cruz says he would first repeal the Affordable Care Act if elected president.

"Once we repeal Obamacare, we're not done. We need health insurance reform. I think health insurance reform should follow some basic principles. It should expand competition. It should empower patients and consumers to make decisions and consultations with their doctors and it should keep government bureaucrats from getting between us and our doctors," said Sen. Cruz.

He says he would then implement a 16 percent flat tax for businesses.

"The thing about the simple flat tax is it puts the American manufacturers and farmers and ranchers on a level playing field all across the globe," Sen. Cruz said.

He also says he would work to keep regulations restricting gun rights from becoming law.

"Which means the next time a jihadist walks into a recruiting center, he's going to encounter the businesses end of firearms wielded by a dozen marines,” said Sen. Cruz.

Some Sun City residents say they agree with Senator Cruz on multiple issues, including eliminating the Department of Education and the Common Core Standards.

"I think it's because there's so much in education. It's not really education anymore. It's brainwashing to a large degree and I would like to see that turned around. That's not the way it started in this country and I'd like to see it go back to the way it was,” said Roberta Sharpe, who lives in Sun City.

The senator also told the crowd that he plans this week to ask congress to pass a law forbidding the United States from accepting Syrian refugee immigrants, Some of whom Sen. Cruz says are terrorists.

"ISIS has been very clear, they intend to do in America what they did in Paris. They intend to carry out the same acts of terror and if we simply allow them to come in and wage jihad it's an act of colossal foolishness," Sen Cruz said.

The town hall wrapped up with a question and answer session and some in attendance say they appreciated the senator’s specific plans.

"It's quite unique to have laid out specifically already before even the Iowa Caucus," said Joyce Barker, who lives in Sun City.

Ted Cruz is also holding a town hall in Greenville in December.