The Carlsbad Current-Argus (Photo: File Photo)

A recent column by the Rio Grande Foundation’s Paul Gessing argues that Medicaid expansion to cover low-income New Mexicans is a bad deal for the state – and even for people who are getting health coverage as a result of the decision by Gov. Martinez and the Legislature to expand eligibility as provided under the Affordable Care Act. In fact, Medicaid expansion has been positive for New Mexico on many levels.

Expansion has greatly reduced the number of uninsured New Mexicans.That helps them, because people with health coverage – whether through private insurance or public programs like Medicaid and Medicare – have better access to care and better health status as a result. They’re less likely to delay or forgo care, more likely to get timely diagnosis and treatment, and less likely to suffer crippling medical debt.

The Oregon study Gessing mentioned, comparing people who got Medicaid through a lottery and those who didn’t, showed the positive outcomes of Medicaid coverage. Harvard researchers determined that the group getting coverage had better access to care and received more recommended preventive care. They were more likely to have a regular source of care, they reported being in better health, and the incidence of depression fell. (Gessing airily dismisses this result, but depression is a serious medical condition, and improvement in mental health is a significant and positive outcome.)

People who got Medicaid had fewer unpaid medical bills and were less likely to have to borrow or delay paying other bills to cover health care costs, reducing financial stress for patients (and benefiting providers at the same time). That kind of economic security is a key reason for having insurance.

Contrary to Gessing’s contention that government-sponsored health care encourages people to quit their jobs, the researchers found no significant change in work participation for those who gained Medicaid coverage.

Impacts on physical health were more limited than for mental health, but the small sample size calls for caution in concluding that Medicaid failed to improve physical health. Especially as another Harvard study, comparing three states that expanded Medicaid for low-income adults before the ACA with three neighboring states that didn’t, found that Medicaid coverage not only improved access to care and health status, but actually reduced the number of deaths. Medicaid saves lives.

Getting people covered and helping them improve their health and well-being is the most important reason to support Medicaid expansion, but it brings a number of other benefits as well.

Reduced uncompensated care: Uncompensated care has fallen as more New Mexicans gain health coverage, easing financial pressures on hospitals. National studies find a much larger drop in expansion states than non-expansion states. Failure to expand Medicaid has been cited as a major factor in rural hospital closures in non-expansion states.

Uncompensated care has fallen as more New Mexicans gain health coverage, easing financial pressures on hospitals. National studies find a much larger drop in expansion states than non-expansion states. Failure to expand Medicaid has been cited as a major factor in rural hospital closures in non-expansion states. Reduced cost-shifting : Providers make up for uncompensated care by shifting those costs to other payers, which increases private insurance premiums and prices for health care. Expanding coverage reduces that shift.

: Providers make up for uncompensated care by shifting those costs to other payers, which increases private insurance premiums and prices for health care. Expanding coverage reduces that shift. Economic activity : The federal government pays the full cost of the expansion through 2016 and 90 percent or more after that. These federal funds infuse significant additional dollars into New Mexico’s economy. Jeff Mitchell of the UNM Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER) says spending related to the expansion is largely driving income growth in New Mexico, accounting for more than a third of overall growth in the past year.

: The federal government pays the full cost of the expansion through 2016 and 90 percent or more after that. These federal funds infuse significant additional dollars into New Mexico’s economy. Jeff Mitchell of the UNM Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER) says spending related to the expansion is largely driving income growth in New Mexico, accounting for more than a third of overall growth in the past year. Job creation : A Fitch Ratings study found that far more health care jobs have been created in states that adopted Medicaid expansion than in those that refused. BBER determined that health care accounted for 40% of all jobs created in New Mexico in recent quarters.

: A Fitch Ratings study found that far more health care jobs have been created in states that adopted Medicaid expansion than in those that refused. BBER determined that health care accounted for 40% of all jobs created in New Mexico in recent quarters. Federal funds replacing state and local expenditures, yielding savings for state and local governments in areas such as behavioral health, corrections and public health.

Revenue to the state from existing taxes, including income, gross receipts and insurance premium taxes: BBER’s Lee Reynis gives a conservative estimate of more than $700 million in revenue 2014-2020, more than twice the state’s cost for the expansion.

All of this rebuts the argument that expansion is a bad deal. If it were, why have 30 states – including many led by Republican governors – adopted it? And others are considering the move – even Gov. Bentley of Alabama, one of the reddest of red states, is indicating he’s open to it, and the Health Care Improvement Taskforce he appointed recommended it unanimously. It’s a smart thing to do.

Ellen Pinnes is a Health Policy Consultant that lives in Santa Fe.

Read or Share this story: http://c-cargus.co/1jlV8Te