By Lucky Oji

Prince Eric Oharisi, is a royal prince of Ughelli Kingdom, Ughelli North local government area of Delta State, a chieftain of the ruling People’s Democratic Party, PDP, and also deputy state chairman, National Union of Road Transport Workers, NURTW, Delta State chapter. In this interview with Sunday Vanguard, he reveals his plans to contest the State House of Assembly seat come 2015 to represent Ughelli North constituency II and why Deltans should support Governor Uduaghan.

Why are you in politics?

I am in politics to contribute to the development of the state and my immediate constituency.

It will interest you to know that am presently preparing and looking for an opportunity to serve my people better and further contribute immensely to the development of my immediate constituency, and that is why am eyeing the State House of Assembly seat come 2015 to represent Ughelli North constituency II.

Every human being is a politician, even in doing business there is politics, but honestly I have been a politician and activist all my life, and I think it is a career that I intend to sustain and improve on.

Ughelli North constituency II, is presently being represented in the State House by a member of opposition party, the Democratic People’s Party, DPP, so how does your party, PDP, intend to reclaim the seat come 2015?

The ruling People’s Democratic Party, PDP, has been and still remains the only strong and formidable party in Ughelli North local government area. PDP is the only party that still has competent and functioning structures in the state and all members of the party in Ughelli North are intact, unlike other members of opposition parties who are running from party to party.

Reclaiming the seat will be very simple and easy for my party, PDP. One of the major steps to achieving it is why I am contesting for the State House of Assembly come 2015, and with me in the race, it is a boost to my party.

We have the supporters and followers, and do not forget that come 2015, we are not leaving any stone unturned, because PDP is the only party that has brought good governance and dividends of democracy to Delta State and to my immediate constituency.

Do you think your party will give you support to emerge candidate of the party?

Yes, am very sure and that is why am in the race. Honestly, 2015 is the appropriate time for my party to reciprocate for all that I have been doing, supporting the party. I know my party, PDP will give me all the needed support to emerge the party candidate for the State House of Assembly come 2015.

Could you assess the performance of the present member representing your constituency in State Assembly?

Whatever I will say now,honestly people will misinterpret it that because he is a member of opposition party. Please we should leave that for the people of Ughelli North constituency II to judge.

He is their representative in the State House, so I think it is the people that would also assess his performance at the end of his tenure, and after that they will decide what to do.

How about Governor Emmanuel Uduaghan’s performance, with less than 20 months to complete his tenure?

Dr. Emmanuel Uduaghan is among the performing governors in Nigeria. From 2007, when he assumed office as the executive governor of Delta, he has performed credibly well.

He has made record for himself. Only the Asaba Airport project has written his name in gold, and he will forever be remembered for it.

And apart from the Asaba Airport, the people of Delta State should be able to see that projects that were not in the state before 2007, are the projects we are all seeing across the state presently, so I wonder how people assesses the governor.

Former Governor James Ibori, initiated the upgrading of our schools by fencing virtually all schools in the state and today most of our schools have been renovated and fully upgraded to modern standards by Governor Uduaghan.

New roads were being constructed by the present administration and roads not completed by Ibori’s administration are completed .

We have the free health care, micro-credit programme, scholarship schemes, effective and affordable transportation system, provision of buses and tricycles to boost transportation across the state proudly initiated and sponsored by Governor Uduaghan’s administration and several other laudable programmes being run by the present administration, this is just to mention but a few.

Sincerely, I will tell you that Governor Uduaghan has performed well, and we are also expecting more from him before the end of his tenure because he has promised finishing strong, and we shall continue supporting him to finish strong.

How is your relationship with the governor?

My relationship with my amiable Governor Uduaghan has been very cordial. Remember, he is the governor and leader of the party, and as a committed and loyal member of the party it is my responsibility to maintain a cordial relationship with my leader, the governor, and all leaders and stakeholders of the party.

Governor Udaughan is someone to really work with, and him being the leader of party, I can assure you that come 2015; PDP will be the only existing party in Delta State.

Some people in the state have been criticizing Governor Uduaghan for one reason or the other, do you subscribe to such criticism?

Some of the persons or individuals criticizing Governor Uduaghan today, if you give them such position or opportunity they will fail completely. We should learn to encourage those in authority.

Though, those in authority may have their shortcomings, but the fact remains that, as Deltans we must learn to put aside ethnic sentiments, personal interests and continue to show love to one another, leave in peace and harmony irrespective of tribes and political affiliations.

The President and governors need our prayers and encouragement to succeed.