The Nuggets brought in a quartet of players for a pre-draft workout on Friday morning at the Pepsi Center, headlined by Arizona guard Nick Johnson and Metro State guard Brandon Jefferson.

It is the first of two consecutive days of workouts, which ends Saturday morning with the spotlight on Syracuse point guard Tyler Ennis and UCLA shooting guard Zach LaVine.

Friday’s round of workouts featured players trying to prove themselves for different reasons.

Johnson, the leader of an Arizona Wildcats team that finished 33-5 and advanced all the way to the Elite Eight of the NCAA Tournament, is looking to improve his stock from fringe first round choice to a more solid first-round footing. He declared for the draft after that, his junior season.

“I’m just reiterating my game, being a winner, being a team player, being that consistent person,” said Johnson, who averaged 16.3 points and 4.1 rebounds per game during the season. “And showing that my position, being a combo guard, is a plus not a minus.”

The 6-foot-2 Johnson is a solid defensive guard, which is of most importance to the Nuggets, who are looking to improve their perimeter defensive profile this offseason.

“From Day 1, you’re going to get my leadership, my good attitude and a solid defender,” Johnson said. “I’m going to work my tail off. And it’s easy for me because it’s something that I like to do. I love playing defense, I love getting blocked shots, I love coming over on help side and stuff like that. I think that’s definitely one of the big draws for me.”

Meanwhile, the 5-foot-9 Jefferson is out to prove that height is nothing but a number.

He’s already turned heads being the Division II men’s player of the year for a Metro State team that finished 32-2 and advanced to the semifinals of the NCAA Division II tournament.

“In the NBA, it’s all about height,” said Jefferson, who displayed every bit of the sharp shooting that led him to average 45.3 percent from the 3-point line. Jefferson scored 21.6 points per game. “I’m done growing. I think I can make it (to the NBA). I have the confidence, God gave me good talent. I’ve just got to work my butt off and make it.”

Jefferson pointed to former Nuggets Earl Boykins and Anthony Carter as examples of smaller guards that did just fine. And in fact the Nuggets have two sub-six footers at guard in starter Ty Lawson and reserve Nate Robinson.

Getting a shot with the Nuggets’ summer league team — or any other NBA team’s summer league squad — would be the next logical step for Jefferson.

“It would be a great opportunity to see how the NBA works, the different coaches, the different plays and stuff,” Jefferson said. “So that’s my goal to make the summer league.”

Also in the workout were Towson forward Jerrelle Benimon and Central Florida guard Isaiah Sykes. Sykes could not finish the workout due to a hamstring injury.

NUGGETS WORKOUTS TO DATE

The Nuggets have worked out seven players to date — two formal workouts and one private workout. Here is the list of players who have visited.

F Jerrelle Benimon, Towson

SG Jabari Brown, Missouri

SG Gary Harris, Michigan State

SF Rodney Hood, Duke (private)

G Brandon Jefferson, Metro State

G Nick Johnson, Arizona

G Isaiah Sykes, Central Florida

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost