SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On the morning after President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address, former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin blasted him for his “faux populism” and crony capitalism, saying it was “galling” to hear Obama “pretend to care about the little guy.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Obama tried to frame himself and Democrats as fighters for the middle class on Tuesday evening, but Palin pointed out that “despite all the happy talk and rainbow kisses in his second to last State of the Union address, President Obama has utterly failed middle class Americans who are making less and spending more to survive in his economy. And he has no real plan to help them.”

“I’m no special pleader for the super rich,” she wrote in a Wednesday morning Facebook post. “They can take care of themselves, and Barack Obama has been the friend of every crony capitalist on Wall Street attending his $30,000-a-plate fundraisers. So, it’s really galling to hear this President pretend to care about the little guy.”

She then pushed for a flat tax and the repeal of job-killing legislation like Obamacare to really help middle-class families:

Let’s be honest. Tinkering in the margins of the tax code isn’t going to bring lasting prosperity to America’s middle class. Our tax code needs major reform. Mr. President, if you truly seek equality in the tax code, then let’s talk about a flat tax. Let’s get rid of all the loop holes carved out by the wealthy and politically connected. Bring us together to pass sensible flat tax legislation. Every American will thank you on tax day! The only people who will hate this are those who are benefitting from the current convoluted tax code with its thousands of special interest exemptions and carve-outs. Enough of this faux-populism about taxing the rich while protecting the broken tax code that benefits them. Mr. President, if you truly care about equality and fairness, give us a sensible flat tax. The tax code isn’t the only thing standing in the way of prosperity in America. The middle class needs good paying jobs that can sustain a family. No American should be stuck in a entry level minimum wage job for their entire life. We want Americans to climb the economic ladder, not get stuck on the first rung. To create those good paying jobs, we need to address the problems standing in the way of job creation. We need to replace job-killing legislation like Obamacare, which has failed on every level by making health care more expensive for average Americans while providing them with less choices and worse care. We need to consider the consequences of policies like the 1,200 new regulations the Obama administration rammed through last month in the 15 days right before the new year – regulations that will cost the American taxpayer $181 billion in new fees and further stymie job growth. Ask yourself, is it easier today under Barack Obama’s policies to open a business and hire people or is it harder? ‘Nuff said.

She also called out Obama for not even mentioning the country’s “staggering $18 trillion national debt” and basically ignoring his “colossal and dangerous” foreign policy failures: