St. Patrick's Day parade is scheduled for 2 p.m. March 7, with South Amboy businessman and community leader Hugh Rone as grand marshal

The 2015 St. Patrick’s Day Parade in South Amboy will be on March 7. (Photo: ~File) Story Highlights Hugh Rone, owner of The Gundrum Service "Home for Funerals," will be this year's grand marshal.

State Sen. Peter Barnes Jr. is this year's honorary grand marshal.

The tradition lives on in South Amboy, with the announcement of the 2015 St. Patrick's Day Parade and its honorees. Step-off for this year's parade is scheduled for 2 p.m. March 7, with South Amboy businessman and community leader Hugh Rone, owner of The Gundrum Service "Home for Funerals," serving as this year's grand marshal.

A U.S. Navy veteran and member of the American Legion Post 62 in South Amboy, Rone is also a longtime parishioner and active member of St. Mary Church. He has given his time and talent to countless community groups, including the South Amboy AOH, Knights of Columbus Council 426, BPO Elks Lodge 784 and the Irish American Association of South Amboy. The parade committee invites the town and all its neighbors to join Rone, along with his wife, Barbara, children Ryan and Sean Moran, Randi and James Simonetti, Regan Rone and Riley Rone and grandchildren Maisie and Rory Moran and Anthony and James Simonetti, in celebrating St. Patrick's Day.

Additional parade honorees include Phyllis Stratton serving as deputy grand marshal. Stratton is a graduate of Woodbridge High School and Rutgers University, She is a teacher at South Amboy Middle/High School and has served the community as a Girl Scout/Brownie leader, president of the South Amboy PTO and T-ball coach. In addition, Stratton has co-directed with her husband of 30 years, Brian, eight musical productions with the South Amboy High School Players. They also have co-coached the Cardinal McCarrick High School girls tennis team for the past three years. Marching with her will be husband Brian, children Matthew, Samantha and Scott and her mother-in-law Marlene Letwenski, and her extended family and friends. Marching in spirit are her parents, George and Dorothy Jesberger, and her father-in-law, Louis Letwenski.

Former Assemblyman and present state Sen. Peter Barnes Jr. is this year's honorary grand marshal. Barnes is a U.S. Army veteran who served as a private first class in the Military Police. After the service, he was a special agent for the FBI, and over the years served as director of public safety in Edison and chairman of the N.J. State Parole Board. He lives with his wife, Barbara, in Edison and has four children — Peter III, Patrick, Sheila and Kelly — and 10 grandchildren.

Also included as parade honorees are WCTC radio host Burt Baron and two of South Amboy's esteemed religious leaders, Father Dennis Weezorak and Father Stanley Gromadzki.

Each year, numerous civic and nonprofit organizations show their support for the city of South Amboy and its Irish heritage at this fun family event. The parade continues its success thanks to support from local business, individuals and corporate sponsors. Their generous donations help to defray the cost of the many pipe bands and marching bands attending each year. Grand Marshals' Night, the annual fundraising event to commemorate the parade honorees, is set for Jan. 30. This official kickoff to the 2015 parade season will take place at the Ancient Order of Hibernians Hall, Second Street and Stevens Avenue. Festivities begin at 7 p.m. and include a buffet dinner, beer, wine, soda, music and a special appearance from the award-winning Col. D.B. Kelly Pipes & Drums. Tickets are $40 and can be purchased at the AOH Hall, Main Liquors or the South Amboy Y.

The first "Tip-A-Pint" afternoon will be on Feb. 22 at the AOH Hall, and the popular "Tip-a-Pint Nite" will be from 6:30 to 9:30 p.m. March 5 at South Stevens Pub. Admission for each is $20 and includes food, beer, wine and soda. The Col. D.B. Kelly Pipes & Drums will perform. Tickets will be available at the door.

For groups interested in becoming a part of this St. Patrick's Day tradition or for additional information, contact the parade committee at saparade6@gmail.com, visit the South Amboy St. Patrick's Day Parade website at southamboyparade.com, or contact parade committee chairperson Mickey Gross at 732-721-5031.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1BciON6