Jennifer Aniston’s braid could be the new Rachel. For those who don’t remember when the age-defying actress was a twenty-something on the popular television situation comedy Friends, the Rachel was the affectionate nickname given to Aniston’s most popular hairstyle on the show. Now it’s Jennifer’s Aniston’s braid that’s making all the headlines.

Chris McMillan is the man behind Jennifer Aniston’s braid, and it’s no coincidence that he was the man behind the Rachel. The two of them are longtime friends, and McMillan was the first to share a picture of the “artfully messy fishtail braid” online, reported the Daily Mail.

Although Aniston jokingly complained that McMillan was the “bane” of her existence for creating the Rachel in the first place, it is obvious that she has a lot of affection for her good friend. It seems like Aniston was the only person who didn’t love the Rachel anyhow. The fun style is probably the most recognizable celebrity hairstyle from the decade of the 1990s, and people will still be talking about it long after everyone has forgotten about Jennifer Aniston’s braid.

Aniston’s stylist works out of a Beverly Hills salon, and the petite 45-year-old actress was spotted entering the facility for a new style just last week. She didn’t have to sit at the salon alone because her doting husband-to-be arrived shortly thereafter to keep her company. There’s no word on how long it took McMillan to arrange her hair, but response to the new hairdo has been overwhelmingly positive. That should come as no surprise. Aniston looks adorable no matter what she does.

According to E! Online, there could be a very interesting reason for Jennifer Aniston’s fishtail braid. The site theorized that the new look is actually part of a test shoot for an upcoming film role in the flick Living Proof. Either way, the style has just about everyone’s stamp of approval. Congratulations to Chris McMillan. He might have just created a new iconic hairstyle.

As previously reported by The Inquisitr,Jennifer Aniston has been the subject of recent rumors that she still harbors feelings for hunky ex-husband Brad Pitt. However, that ship sailed a very long time ago, and Aniston seems like the type of woman who knows how to live her life in the present, not the past. Besides, Pitt has settled down quite nicely with Angelina Jolie, and the couple is raising a brood of children together.

How much do you love Jennifer Aniston’s braid?

[Image via Chris McMillan Instagram]