Owners Kris Klauber, left, and Asa Firestone remove an outdoor light to be replaced with a new fixture at the Boulder Adventure Lodge, formerly the Boulder Mountain Lodge, at the entrance of Fourmile Canyon on Thursday. ( David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer )

Happy hour might be coming to Fourmile Canyon.

The Boulder Adventure Lodge has started an online petition to gauge public support for the lodge acquiring a liquor license in the hopes of providing a drinking and gathering place for visitors and canyon residents.

Kris Klauber and Asa Firestone bought the establishment at 91 Fourmile Canyon Drive, formerly the Boulder Mountain Lodge, in 2014 with plans to focus on serving adventure sports enthusiasts.

Klauber, a former manager at the Mountain Sun Pub & Brewery, said he and Firestone always hoped to be able to serve alcohol at the lodge.

"This has been part of our business plan all along," Klauber said. "It's just a nice thing for our guests, and we thought it would be a fun idea."

Advertisement

Klauber said they haven't finished renovating the lodge and aren't sure what the facility will look like yet, so they haven't submitted any formal liquor license applications. But they started the petition because public input is a part of the process to obtain a license.

"It's something we were going to need eventually," Klauber said. "We thought we would just go ahead and start it."

And so far, Klauber said, people have been receptive to the idea.

"We've had nothing but positive feedback," he said.

Boulder resident Colin Simon was one of the people to sign the petition in support of the lodge getting its liquor license.

"When it gets really hot in the summertime, everybody will want to go to the mouth of the canyon and have fun and drink a beer or two," Simon said.

Sheree Stroud, an administrative assistant for the Boulder County commissioners, said the closest places with liquor licenses in unincorporated Boulder County are Wedgewood at Boulder Creek and two places in Gold Hill.

Klauber said having a liquor license would mean guests would not have to go into town to grab a drink, and canyon residents could stop by. The hope is that they can submit an application by late summer

"It's primarily an amenity for our guests, but we would also like to encourage locals to have a beer as well," Klauber said. "There's actually quite a large community up here in Fourmile."

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars