BRECKENRIDGE — The high winds and blowing snow that buffeted Breckenridge’s Grand Prix slopestyle course and halfpipe did more than cancel contests. For some, the cancellation killed Olympic hopes.

The Grand Prix’s delegates from the International Ski Federation, which governs skiing and snowboarding, decided Saturday afternoon to not elevate qualifying results from snowboard halfpipe and slopestyle contests as final results. For athletes with Olympic spots on the line, the lack of a result ended their quest for Sochi.

“All I needed was a top 10,” said Kjersti Buass, the Norwegian snowboarder who qualified third in Thursday’s slopestyle contest. With only eight women in the finals, she had her result to make Norway’s slopestyle team.

Buass joined several other snowboard slopestyle women in an emotional lobbying of the FIS jury Saturday. All eight of the women’s finalists voiced support for making qualifying results final.

“I don’t get it. Especially now when such important things are at stake. We are all here. We are unanimous. Please reconsider this decision,” said Buass, who spent the early season recovering from a shoulder injury and counted the Breckenridge Grand Prix — a World Cup event — as her last opportunity to make her fourth Olympics.

“I finally put down a good run and I was really stoked and all these emotions just let go and now suddenly someone is coming in and deciding it won’t count.”

Jamie Anderson, the perennial slopestyle champion, qualified first on Thursday with her A-game run. She learned to go hard in every run — preliminaries or finals — at last year’s U.S. Open, when snow cancelled the final event and the qualifying order became podium positions.

“I was in second and I did a mellow run,” for her final qualifying run, she said. “I learned that day to always go for it. Always work hard when you can because this happens a lot. I worked really hard here to get that top qualifying because I had a feeling this was all going to go down.”

U.S. Snowboarding may add a third finals event at next week’s final two Olympic qualifying contests at California’s Mammoth Mountain.

“I don’t like seeing guys who stepped up and landed runs and got into finals and then all the sudden the guys who didn’t are getting a get out of jail free card,” said Ben Boyd, the snowboard director for the Vail Ski and Snowboard Club, which counts several Olympic hopefuls as members. Boyd suggested running just a finals event with Breckenridge Grand Prix qualifiers at Mammoth.

FIS technical delegate Jim Sidorchuk said ski and snowboarding have different rulebooks and that’s why Wednesday’s men’s and women’s ski slopestyle qualifying results were made final when the finals contests was cancelled Friday.

Both men’s and women’s halfpipe and slopestyle snowboarders were discussing appeals late Saturday. Teams and athletes have 48 hours to file an appeal and the FIS appeals board has 72 hours to issue a decision.

“I’m doing everything I can to expedite the process,” said FIS event director Bill Van Gilder.

But he is not reconsidering the decision.

“Although it won’t appease all the parties involved, I think the process was fair and just,” Van Gilder said when he announced the decision.

Event organizers were tentatively planning to move forward with ski halfpipe finals on Sunday, but another weather front was forecast to move into Breckenridge late Saturday, bringing more snow and gusting wind.