Obesity costs U.S. health system $150 billion a year

I didn’t have the heart to tell you this on Thanksgiving Day, but 35 percent of American men and women are obese, according to the Centers for Disease Control. The obesity rate among children stands at 18 percent, almost triple the rate in 1980, while adolescents’ rate quadrupled over the same period to 21 percent.

The cost to the U.S. health system: at least $150 billion a year to treat obesity-related illnesses. And that figure is projected to double in the next four years if effective measures are not taken. The global cost of obesity: $2 trillion a year in economic output, a smidgen less than the top two scourges, smoking and armed violence, and catching up fast.

“If its prevalence continues on its current trajectory, (41 percent) of the world’s adult population will be overweight or obese by 2030,” according to the McKinsey Global Institute, which published a report on the economics of obesity last week. The current estimate of 2.1 billion people overweight or obese is “two and a half times the number who are undernourished,” the report notes.

It’s one of a spate of recent studies on the increasing economic toll taken by obesity. Workplace absenteeism in the United States linked to obesity-related diseases — diabetes and heart disease, among others — costs $8.65 billion a year ($907 million in California), according to the Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health.

Obesity, which is significantly more prevalent among lower-income women in the United States, has major ramifications in the workplace. For women, it results in lower compensation and fewer opportunities for higher-paying “personal interaction” jobs — the “wage penalty” paid by overweight women — according to a Vanderbilt University study.

Efforts of the eat less-exercise more variety — for example, first lady Michelle Obama’s “Let’s Move” program — are trying to tackle obesity. Governments, the health care industry, schools foundations and corporations are setting up and financing programs, mostly of an educational nature. Judging by results, it’s like pushing a rock uphill.

“Education and personal responsibility are critical elements of any program to reduce obesity, but not sufficient on their own,” says McKinsey. “Additional interventions are needed that rely less on conscious choices by individuals and more on changes to the environment and societal norms.”

The consulting firm has a list of 74 “intervention levers,” based on dozens of antiobesity pilot programs around the world. They include reducing access to high-calorie foods on supermarket shelves and restaurants menus, eliminating such fare from vending machines in the workplace and schools, and banning TV ads for certain products (as was the case with smoking). “In some cases, regulation may be necessary to level the playing field in relevant industries,” the report states.

On Tuesday, the Food and Drug Administration moved to enforce a provision in the Affordable Care Act requiring food establishments with more than 20 outlets nationwide to post calorie counts on menus and vending machines, and with prepared foods sold in supermarkets, grocery stores, movie theaters and amusement parks.

The rules, which go into effect next year, have prompted howls of protest from trade groups, similar to those that have arisen — successfully except in the case of Berkeley — over imposing small taxes on sugary beverages. It may be the kind of intervention that, as McKinley politely puts it, could come up against an “insufficient political will to overcome reluctance to change.”

It may also require more than confronting the food and beverage side of the problem. According to a Stanford University School of Medicine study published this summer, the number of calories consumed daily by Americans has remained relatively stable since the late 1980s, while the amount of exercise has plunged. “What struck us the most was just how dramatic the change in leisure-time physical activity was,” said Uri Ladabaum, associate professor of gastroenterology and lead author of the study, in a news release.

In a stab of executive action last week, New York’s Office of Children and Family Services ordered licensed day care centers in the state to only serve low-fat milk, water or 100 percent juice for liquid sustenance. Their charges “must have physical activity every day,” which also means no TV or other electronic visual media during meals, nap times or any other time “not part of a planned developmentally appropriate program activity.”

The McKinsey report acknowledges that there is no one-size-fits-all solution, but says more serious, even globally coordinated, attempts must be made.

“The evidence suggests that the economic and societal impact of obesity is deep and lasting,” the report states. “It may entrench social inequalities between generations ... even if the current rise in prevalence can be reversed, the damaging health implications and economic costs the world is experiencing today could persist well into the future.”

Andrew S. Ross is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. E-mail: asross@sfchronicle.com Blog: http://blog.sfgate.com/bottomline Twitter: @andrewsross