Donald Trump's skyrocketing popularity in the presidential polls is bound to come crashing down as his supporters discover the billionaire developer is really not a conservative, C. Edmund Wright, a columnist at Breitbart.com and The American Thinker, tells Newsmax TV. "Eventually, his lack of conservatism is going to be what sinks him because right now he's winning the conservative base," Wright said Wednesday on "The Steve Malzberg Show."Watch Newsmax TV onandGet Newsmax TV on your cable system — Click Here Now "Trump is going to run into a problem. He had a very liberal answer on another cable channel just a few days ago on the 2008 economic crash. [He] decided that he would give every Democrat a pass on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.""I don't think that's very sound and he's also a trade liberal. He agrees with [Sen.] Bernie Sanders on tariffs. That's going to be interesting to see how that plays out."Wright said an exclusive Newsmax poll that shows Trump has surged in the South, even topping southern candidates, is not surprising."He's tapped into the movement. He's tapped into the spirit. He's tapped into what people are looking for … Eventually his lack of conservative principles will be exposed and it's that that will hurt him. It won't be anything the Republican establishment is saying," Wright said.Appearing with Wright on the Malzberg program was Nomiki Konst, founder and executive director of The Accountability Project and host of The Accountability Podcast, who said of Trump's popularity:"The bombastic nature of Trump is what's getting him the press and every time one of his quips goes out and falls, he has another one coming out next week … He's a master of his marketing and he doesn't need all the consultants in the world to market the way that he's doing …""He's going to say whatever. There's no pattern of logic in Trump's ideology. He's saying things just to get attention. He's basically like Hillary Clinton. Hillary Clinton changed her entire opinion on most of the policies. She's running against Bill Clinton's policies. Donald Trump is changing his mind every day …"