For the second year in a row, the CPAC straw poll proved that conservatives ‘stand with Rand,’ as Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) handily nabbed the top spot in the presidential preference category.

On Saturday, the last day of the Conservative Political Action Conference, the results of more than 2,500 votes left Paul with a commanding 31 percent, followed by Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) with 11 percent and Ben Carson with 9 percent. Gov. Chris Christie (R-N.J.) came in at 8 percent and Gov. Scott Walker (R-Wisc.) and former Sen. Rick Santorum (R-Pa.) tied with 7 percent.

And with 42 percent of voters in the poll being students — and 46 of the voters being between the ages of 18-25 — the poll results aren’t exactly unexpected.

But the libertarian theme was distinctly noticeable throughout the answers to CPAC’s poll. A whopping 78 percent agreed with the statement “My most important goal is to promote individual freedom by reducing the size and scope of government and its intrusion into the lives of its citizens.” And 78 percent opposed the “NSA’s use of data collection.”

Plus, 41 percent said marijuana should be legalized and another 21 percent said it should be legal for medicinal purposes.

“It wasn’t just the young people [who voted for legalization],” pollster Tony Fabrizio jokingly noted during the announcement.

A mere 12 percent of voters said, “My most important goal is to promote traditional values by protecting traditional marriage and protecting the life of the unborn.”

Only 7 percent said, “My most important goal is to secure and guarantee American safety at home and abroad regardless of the cost or the size of government.”

Paul graciously acknowledged his win, thanking CPAC attendees.

“I am grateful to all the attendees who stood with me,” the Kentucky Senator said after the results were announced in a statement released via RandPAC. “The fight for liberty continues, and we must continue to stand up and say: We’re free and no one, no matter how well-intentioned, will take our freedoms from us. Together we will stand up for the Constitution. Together we will fight for what is right. Thank you and onwards to victory.”

Paul also tweeted out his thanks after the results of the poll were announced.

Together we'll stand up for the Constitution & fight for what's right. Thanks & onwards to victory! #CPAC2014 pic.twitter.com/0sp64JXYp5 — Senator Rand Paul (@SenRandPaul) March 8, 2014

The polling was only open to registered CPAC attendees, and 63 percent of voters were male, while just 37 percent were female. All 50 states were represented in the data. Votes were collected from Thursday morning to Saturday afternoon. The candidates, listed below, were presented to voters in a randomized order.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie

New Hampshire Sen. Kelly Ayotte

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz

Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback

Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal

Neurosugeon Ben Carson

Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin

Former Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels

Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul

South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley

Texas Gov. Rick Perry

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio

Ohio Gov. John Kasich

Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan

Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum

South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott

South Dakota Sen. John Thune

New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez

Indiana Gov. Mike Pence

Former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice

Ohio Senator Rob Portman

Business executive Donald Trump

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker

Former Florida Rep. Allen West

Francesca Chambers also contributed to this report.