Another good reason to not believe in any polls. This one is put out by CNN. I'll bet the idiots over at msnbc will not be far behind. Don't trust the polls from anyone or any side.

I stopped reading after "CNN poll".

No one should believe a CNN poll -- they are almost as bad as MSNBC.

CNN? Really? Who would have predicted that? Dismiss! They have ZERO credibility.

The only surprise here was that 90 percent of Americans didn't want John to proceed. A liberal poll? Thats like...a joke.

i like to see where these idiot polls are taken and how worded

CNN Poll. Probably polled the Turtle Creek area of Dallas. If you are not familiar with Dallas, I can assure you that many of the residents of Turtle Creek LOVE getting polled.

In which court did Speaker Boehner file this legendary law suit? What good does anyone thing it will do? As far as I can see, it is nothing more than eyewash designed to relieve the grit he has thrown in our faces since he became Speaker of the House. Face it. Crybaby John is just another jellyfish rotting on a beach somewhere. All him and his can hope to accomplish is to annoy and ignore their constituents.

This is Boehner's way of looking like he's pushing back against Obama when it really shows that he's just too cowardly to use the actual Constitutional power of the budget and purse strings to stop Obama's lawlessness. Or as the cynic I've really become, Boehner knows the lawsuit will go nowhere and he's giving tacit approval to Obama's takeover.

Nothing good can come of this lawsuit. Boehner should put on his man pants and use the powers granted by the Constitution to the House and use the power of the purse to shut the administration down until they start to act within the law.

Hey John grow some! Cut off his money. But then again you are in the same party, Progressive. I knew what he was, but you are a coward.

EMBOLDEN him??? That's a joke, right? Boehner has been getting blasted for not standing up and doing something to stop the increasingly emboldened executive orders, and when he does, he gets blasted for doing something to stop the increasingly emboldened executive orders because it might embolden the president into making increasingly emboldened executive orders. Either the poll was screwed, or the polled people were.

The whole United States Justice Department under the crook/cronyism,worthless obama administration must be indicted/investigated for the Chicago corruption scandal please read the truth chicago officials and the obama admin. is in a criminal design to conceal for rogue Dems----------------------------------drafting of a Bill/Congressional order on the next congress/senate hearing PLEASE READ TO PROTECT THE PEOPLE

Choice is hold your nose for two more years. Germany did a lot of damage in only 12 years under you know who. Barry's 8 years has been another national nightmare.Easily as many fetuses got aborted during Barry's 6 year reign already, as any tally can be put on the German you know who.

Cut to the chase. Go for impeachement. Barry earned removal for unfitness in office.

Wake up idiots! These socialist traitors are every bit as insane as any representative of the third reich. They lie in your face and have no compunction as to your belief or disbelief. Jail them. Try them. Punish them.

A majority of Americans oppose House Speaker John Boehner's (R-OH) lawsuit against President Barack Obama for his executive actions on Obamacare.

This is bullshit. In my admittedly small circle of friends I don't know anyone who is against this lawsuit.

Although I think "di_da_is_alha" has a better idea. If the GOP (Boehner) would simply defund all of Barky's missteps the problem would be solved and save a ton of money.

And although not new, cutting foreign aid is not a good idea it is a GREAT IDEA. Especially to every country that voted to investigate Israel for war crimes against Hamas.

Why would anyone trust the results of a CNN poll? Nevertheless, this lawsuit looks pretty fishy (and not only because, as the article mentions, it completely ignores the majority of Obama's lawlessness). The Constitution already grants Congress plenty of power to rein in an imperial, overreaching president. This lawsuit looks more like an attempt by Boehner to shift the pressure to do something off of the GOPe and onto the courts.

Boehner's "lawsuit" is just a fund raising ploy. The House has full authority under the Constitution to impeach and control the purse, yet Boehner will do neither. Boehner is either a coward or complicit. There can be no other explanation.

Don't believe any poll until it agrees with crazy conservatives! In other words, never believe a poll again.The same way all those skewed polls that predicted Obama's easy reelection victory were taken.According to the Google machine, this area has a lot of people of Mexican descent, as well as the center of Dallas' gay scene. So naturally, a national scientific poll would ONLY poll this neighborhood.Oooh, did you just say Boehner is throwing EYEWASH at you? Snap! Thems are fighting words!Shutting down the government is the only solution. What are you waiting for! Before the election would be perfect.When will Republicans stop being so liberal and finally start blocking a Democratic bill or two?There's a third option...But are they worse than Hitler?Remember when no fetuses were aborted under Ronald Reagan, who was totally not like the Nazis?First cause for removal: "He made Breitbart sad"Second cause for removal: "He signed a law that made Breitbart sad"Third cause for removal: "No one likes conservatives anymore, but that poll is skewed because they still do"Fourth cause for removal: "Brown and gay people exist"Fifth cause for removal: "Kenya"ZZZZZZZ ... uh, wuh? I'd dozed off.That scientific sample is bullshit because there is no dissent inside my Fox News Bubble of Death!Why yes, that's true! Seriously. Someone got it right.

Then again, giving the base what it really wants (shutting down the government and impeaching Obama) would utterly annihilate the GOP's electoral chances this November, so it's quite the conundrum. Obama is the worst dictator EVER, worse than Hitler! But, uh, they can't do anything about it because unfortunately for them, no one outside the Fox News Bubble of Death believes that nonsense.