Mayor Bill de Blasio has taken office with a mandate to act quickly on one of his boldest promises: to create or preserve 200,000 affordable housing units. It is a big, complicated problem, and the solutions he has endorsed are not easy.



As an architect who works with the development community, I would add a simple proposal that is not on the mayor's list: make micro-units a standard building option, or “as of right.”



What are micro-units and why are they crucial? The city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development defines a micro-unit as an apartment of less than 400 square feet with a kitchen and bathroom. The city has an 800,000-unit shortage of apartments for singles, the result of a snowballing demographic trend.



More and more people choose to live alone—or would if they could find a suitable apartment. According to research by the Citizens Housing and Planning Council, 56% of the city's housing units are occupied by people living alone or sharing with unrelated adults. Multiple wage earners paying rent for large apartments drive up the price of “family-size” units beyond what a typical family can afford. At the same time, some single and elderly people keep large yet affordable apartments while record numbers of homeless families are in shelters.



Mr. de Blasio could champion the required legislation now. In Manhattan, two zoning changes are needed: Allow apartments to be smaller than 400 square feet, and eliminate the density calculation that effectively limits the number of studio apartments within a building. In the outer boroughs, the city would also have to relax the parking requirement for new buildings. While no one would argue that zoning changes in New York City are easy, it is pretty much that simple—and well within the mayor's purview.



The city has a micro-unit pilot project underway that will prove invaluable in helping city planners understand best practices for building such housing. Strong design guidelines for light, air and common spaces are imperative. But only with an adequate supply of apartments will we be able to substantially improve affordability, and that can happen only if micro-units are a standard option for builders. Coupled with affordable-housing regulations and incentives already endorsed by Mr. de Blasio, this would go a long way toward achieving his housing goals.



After decades of making the industrial city more livable and attractive, New York needs to embark on a new kind of rebalancing. Working people, young people, single people and elderly people are vital parts of the mix that makes neighborhoods vibrant, but they can't find suitable, affordable apartments. Micro-unit housing is an essential piece of the puzzle for New York to remain a city for everyone.



Jonathan Marvel is the founder and principal of Marvel Architects. In partnership with Hamlin Ventures, his design for a micro-unit apartment building was one of five finalists in the city's micro-unit design competition, adAPT New York.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments