Few lobbyists have walked into the kind of political inferno that greeted Stephen J. Ubl when he became the top pitchman for the pharmaceutical industry.

WASHINGTON — Few lobbyists have walked into the kind of political inferno that greeted Stephen J. Ubl when he became the top pitchman for the pharmaceutical industry.

Ubl, the 47-year-old president and chief executive of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, took charge in November, as the Obama administration, presidential candidates, members of Congress, consumer groups, health-insurance companies and doctors were criticizing the prescription drug industry for charging prices they saw as exorbitant and excessive.

The anger has only grown worse.

Stephen J. Ubl Upbringing: Grew up in Minnesota, was the first person in his family to go to college. Washington career: Began as an aide to Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, then worked for the Advanced Medical Technology Association, a trade group for device makers, serving 10 years as its CEO. Personal interest: His 12-year-old son was found last year to have Type 1 diabetes. Source: The New York Times

“Enough is enough,” Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont, the firebrand Democratic presidential candidate, wrote on Twitter last month. “Pfizer and other pharmaceutical companies can no longer be allowed to rip off American patients.”

That anger is just one of the challenges facing Ubl.

“The debate around drug pricing is myopic and misinformed,” he said in an interview. “It’s myopic because 80 percent of health-care costs or more are driven by a small percentage of patients with multiple chronic conditions.”

“And what holds the greatest potential for ameliorating those costs?” he continued. “Better treatments and cures.”

If anyone can find areas of agreement with the critics, or at least work productively with them, it may be Ubl. He is more conversant with the intricacies of health policy, and more adept at the politics, than some of his predecessors.

He is in a tricky position, though: He does not explicitly acknowledge that high drug prices are a problem, but he wants to address the uproar caused by new brand-name drugs that cost more than $100,000 a year and old generic drugs whose prices have skyrocketed in recent months.

“I want my tenure at PhRMA to be marked by pragmatic, pro-consumer policies that ensure access and address holistically some of the issues being raised around health-care costs,” Ubl said.

“Holistic” is a theme of Ubl’s advocacy. Consumers and politicians, he says, must not focus on drug costs in isolation but should consider them in the context of national health spending — and the clinical benefits that drugs provide.

The pharmaceutical and health-products industry spent more on federal lobbying than any other industry in 2015, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, an independent group that tracks money in politics. Within that sector, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America led the list, with $18.4 million in spending on a wide range of health, trade and patent issues. Ubl’s lobbying powerhouse has members that include giants like Amgen, Eli Lilly, Johnson & Johnson, Merck and Pfizer.

The group reported total expenses of nearly $208 million in 2014, the most recent available filing with the Internal Revenue Service. Its 170 employees work at its Washington headquarters, as well as in nine offices in the United States and others in Tokyo and Dubai.

Some of that money is used to cultivate strategic relationships through grants to doctor organizations and nonprofit advocacy groups representing patients with specific diseases like cancer, Alzheimer’s, diabetes and arthritis. And the organization multiplies its influence through more than 30 lobbying, consulting, communications and law firms.

But public outrage over drug prices is boiling. John C. Rother, who leads the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing, backed by consumer, labor and physician groups, said Ubl was in an impossible position.

“The issue is prices,” Rother said, and the lobby for drugmakers, like other trade associations, “can’t do much on prices without getting into trouble under the antitrust laws.” Any efforts to control or suggest prices raise antitrust concerns, federal officials say.

Ubl (pronounced YOU-bul) said the drug lobby had been effective at beating back proposals like allowing the government to negotiate drug prices or import medicines from Canada. But, he said, it has not been as good at formulating and advancing a positive agenda. He hopes to change that.

Brand-name drug companies and manufacturers of lower-cost generic drugs have historically been rivals. But Ubl said he wanted the government to speed the approval of generic drugs and approve more of them, reducing a backlog of generic drug applications. Increased competition, he said, would help hold down prices — and could perhaps avoid another outcry like the one over Daraprim, a drug to treat a life-threatening parasitic infection.

Turing Pharmaceuticals, a startup founded by a former hedge-fund manager, Martin Shkreli, acquired Daraprim last year and immediately increased the price to $750 a tablet, from $13.50.

“People see a knucklehead like Martin Shkreli raised the price of a 62-year-old drug by 5,000 percent, and they connect the dots in a way that is not helpful or is highly misleading,” Ubl said.

Other questions confront the industry’s new chief lobbyist. Betsy M. Imholz, a lawyer at Consumers Union, said brand-name drug companies sometimes obtain patents for small changes or minor variations in their products, allowing them to charge higher prices even though the original versions work just as well.

Ubl said, “What some call small changes are often important clinical advances.”

Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., said some drug companies had been caught defrauding Medicare and Medicaid while reaping “enormous profits as a result of federal research investments.”

Ubl said drug companies and the government played “complementary and collaborative roles,” with drugmakers pouring tens of billions of dollars into research and development each year.

As an example of the type of lobbying he admires, Ubl points to the drug industry’s role in the creation of a prescription drug benefit for Medicare in 2003. Drugmakers were initially skeptical but worked with Congress to shape the legislation and liked the final product so much they ran television advertisements supporting it.

“That is a good analogy for where I want to take this organization — developing policies that we can advocate in support of, that enhance the private market and address the problem holistically,” Ubl said. Medicare’s outpatient drug benefit is managed entirely by private companies under contracts with the government.

The pharmaceutical trade association supported the Affordable Care Act when it was adopted in 2010. But Ubl said he was concerned that “too many patients” have difficulty gaining access to the drugs they need because of high out-of-pocket costs, “prior authorization” requirements and other restrictions imposed by health plans sold on the insurance exchanges.

Ubl expresses interest in a new model of payment under which insurers pay drug companies based on how well their treatments work in patients. Payment might be linked, for example, to the effectiveness of a drug in preventing heart attacks or curing hepatitis, or its ability to control blood-sugar levels in a person with diabetes.

Lilly and Anthem, a major insurer, recently announced a joint effort to devise such “value-based pricing” arrangements. Novartis, a Swiss drugmaker, struck deals with Cigna and Aetna under which payments for a new heart drug would be linked to its effectiveness in reducing hospitalizations for heart failure.