With 130 full-time employees, Sun Construction & Facility Services falls under the 100-or-more full-time employee guidelines of the Affordable Care Act. That means that as of Jan. 1, Sun is required to offer health insurance to its staff.

Like many businesses of this size, Sun has offered health benefits for a long time, as a way to ensure they have a solid, skilled and dependable workforce. But despite having covered their staff for years, Sun Construction has to play by the new rules and regulations, and that has been a challenge.

"We've had to devote a lot of staff and a lot of hours to figuring this all out," Sun Construction President Andy Welch said. "We have increased our investment in time by 500 percent or more in managing our health care benefits."

The full-time and insured staff at Avery Brewing won't feel much of an impact from the Affordable Care Act. (Cliff Grassmick / For the Times-Call)

At Sun Construction, changes needed to be made to the existing health plan — for example, the amount of time an employee needed to spend at the company before being eligible for the health plan. To be in line with the ACA, Sun needed to change that waiting period from the existing 12 months to no more than 90 days. They chose the first payday after 60 days of employment.

Affordable Care Act and small business Businesses of 100 or more full-time equivalent employees must be insuring workers by Jan. 1, 2015 Businesses of 50-99 full-time equivalent employees must be insuring workers by Jan. 1, 2016. Businesses of less than 50 full-time equivalent employees are not required to insure workers. For a list of FAQs about the ACA's effect on small business, go to tinyrul.com/acafaqs1.

"What's painful is the constant shift of target dates and deadlines," Welch said. "It's been go fast and then stop, go fast and then stop. The inability of the federal government to roll out a full plan. ... I can't imagine how they will ever do the accountability and enforcement side of things."

It has been 4 ½ years since the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was signed into law. On Oct. 1, 2013, open enrollment for insurance in the Health Insurance Marketplace (also known as health exchanges) began.

Since then, new surveys in Colorado and across the country show that small businesses remain confused about the ACA and are for the most part spending more in health coverage for their employees. According to a new survey by Delta Dental of Colorado, more than half of small businesses said that the ACA has increased their costs.

Under the ACA, companies with fewer than 50 full-time equivalent employees — and that's the majority of small businesses — are not required to offer health insurance to employees. Businesses with 50 to 99 employees must offer health insurance by Jan. 1, 2016.

'Still very confused'

"Employers are still very confused about this," explained Ryan Sarni, labor relations attorney for Mountain States Employers Council in Denver. "It's a very complex law. I spend a lot of time explaining this to businesses."

He said a majority of employers need assistance understanding the tax implications, specific requirements and other specifics of the ACA.

The Delta Dental survey seconds that notion. They surveyed 320 small businesses across the state.

"Small business owners, even today, aren't familiar with their options," said Mark Thompson, director of sales for Delta Dental of Colorado. "It was surprising as we did our survey to find that a lot of small businesses had no idea what the impact of the ACA would have on them."

Great Harvest Bread Co. owner Jim Giveans doubts he can ever offer health care coverage to his employees. To view a video, visit TimesCall.com. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

The top points of confusion for business owners?

"If I had to pick, I'd say that the most common question I get is about variable-hour employees," said Sarni.

An employer has to determine which of their employees are full time under the law — that is, work 30 hours per week on average — and then determine how and when to provide those employees with insurance, Sarni said.

For ongoing employees who definitely work 30 hours or more per week, it's an easy calculation: They must be provided with insurance no later than 90 days after they begin full time employment, or the employer risks paying a fine.

For ongoing employees who definitely work less than 30 hours per week, it's also an easy calculation: There's no mandate to provide them with insurance.

However, with employees who work 20 hours some weeks but 32 hours or 35 hours other weeks, and so on, it becomes very complex.

Sarni says this is a common problem with employees who do janitorial work or work for temp agencies, restaurants and call centers. The employer has to set up a measurement period for them of between three and 12 months, over which time they track their hours worked to determine if they are working an average of 30 hours per week. If they are, then a stability period follows during which time they are guaranteed insurance even if they work less than 30 hours per week.

Sarni said that variable-hour employees normally make up a small percentage of an employer's work force, but the amount of time it takes companies to comply with requirements for them is much more than what it takes for full- or part-timers.

Costs going up

"It hasn't made anything more affordable. It didn't solve any problems for small business," said Bill Lindsay, president of Lockton Mountain West Benefit Group, an insurance brokerage firm in Denver, and author of its 14th annual Colorado employer survey regarding health benefit costs and coverage.

"Our (insurance) rate of increase in Colorado is higher than the rest of the country," he continued. "For 2015 it's projected to be 8 percent in Colorado and 3 percent in the rest of the country.

"The real culprit is that costs continue to go up; the ACA did nothing to reduce it. So a lot of small businesses don't feel very positive about it."

According to Lindsay, as health care costs rise, employers continue to be forced into making difficult decisions.

"A lot of small businesses are saying the cost is prohibitive," Lindsay explained. "Lots of under-50 companies are thinking about cutting health benefits altogether. And those small businesses with 50 to 99 employees are really feeling pressured. They lack the leverage of the larger businesses."

But some businesses seem to be skating through the process.

"It's an interesting subject," explained Holly Pearson, human resources director of Avery Brewing. The Boulder company has just under 100 full-time staff, although that number is expected to climb just after the new year as they move into a larger facility in Gunbarrel.

"We've always been in compliance, so for us there has been very little impact," Pearson said.

She added that for Avery Brewing it's just been a matter of tweaking their existing health benefit programs. "We didn't wait for a mandate."

The small guys

But one small-business owner believes the ACA will reduce the likelihood he will ever offer health care to his employees.

"I haven't offered health care coverage," Jim Giveans, owner of Great Harvest Bread in Longmont, said.

Since he employs around 10 full- and part-time employees, Giveans is not required by the ACA to provide health care. But he'd like to.

"The ACA lowers the chance I will ever offer health care," he said. "It's a growing cost that I cannot afford. It's cost-prohibitive. We're just a small business."

Giveans, who has owned the Great Harvest for six years, said his own rates have gone up because of the ACA.

Rich Crist, who owns Dynamic Designs Printing and Marketing in Longmont, has struggled with the ACA for his individual policy. (With a two-person shop, he's not required to provide insurance for his employee.)

He called the ACA confusing and overwhelming to go through, and he blames it for rising premiums.

"It's a never ending battle," Crist explained. "For the small guy it hurts. As a small business owner, I have to consider changing my policy every year for a better plan we can afford."

Moving forward

"It's important to know that workers are better off if they buy coverage on the exchange, especially those making lower wages," said Ed Haislmaier, senior research fellow on health policy at the conservative-leaning Heritage Foundation.

"The larger end of the small business market will shift to self-insurance. That way you get out from under the taxes on premiums."

A self-insured group health plan (or a self-funded plan as it is also called) is one in which the employer assumes the financial risk for providing health care benefits to its employees. Self-insurance is a way for a business to lower ongoing premium expenditures and to take control of low-level risks within the organization. This is achieved by the business becoming its own insurer. The business creates a fund of money and manages the fund and any claims asserted.

But Haislmaier's numbers indicate a growing shift from employer-sponsored coverage to private health insurance coverage. He says more employees are buying their own health insurance, either to save money or because their employer stopped offering coverage if they don't have to under the ACA.

The ACA itself might come under fire in January, as Republicans — who held on to governor's seats in key states — expand their control of the House and take control of the Senate. increases its control of Congress.

While it appears that repeal could be a long shot, the GOP could target specific pieces of the act, such as raising the definition of "full-time" to 40 hours.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com /vincewinkel.