But she has spoken up in other ways – just not very conservative-like:

I've never been comfortable with Carly Fiorina because she ran as a no-issues moderate for the 2010 senate race in California, and she hasn't articulated any conservative principles before 2015.

Immediately after 9/11, Carly gave a speech where, in light of the 3,000 Americans who had just been slaughtered, her first concern was for... Muslims.

And as a business leader, I experienced a whole other set of emotions - first and foremost concern for the safety of our employees and their families. Concern for the security of our employees who are of Middle Eastern descent or who practice the Muslim religion here in the US and abroad. Concern for employees who are traveling, and how to get them home to their families as fast as possible. And then a concern for the safety of customers and partners located in the World Trade Center complex, in the Pentagon, and in the airline industry.

"...and then concern for World Trade Center victims." Well, I'm glad the victims fit into her list of priorities, somewhere. But in case you are thinking this is simply a paragraph written out of order, there's more:

There was once a civilization that was the greatest in the world. It was able to create a continental super-state that stretched from ocean to ocean, and from northern climes to tropics and deserts. Within its dominion lived hundreds of millions of people, of different creeds and ethnic origins. And this civilization was driven more than anything, by invention. Its architects designed buildings that defied gravity. Its mathematicians created the algebra and algorithms that would enable the building of computers, and the creation of encryption. Its doctors examined the human body, and found new cures for disease. Its astronomers looked into the heavens, named the stars, and paved the way for space travel and exploration. Its writers created thousands of stories. Stories of courage, romance and magic. Its poets wrote of love, when others before them were too steeped in fear to think of such things. ... the civilization I’m talking about was the Islamic world from the year 800 to 1600...

That's right, Carly is romanticizing the old Islamic caliphate. Really. And not only is she waxing romantic about it, but she is doing so right after 9/11. At the very least, after 3,000 Americans were killed by radical Muslims, it's a tone-deaf thing to do. And to whitewash a regime that slaughtered and enslaved people of other religions is not explainable.

Then in 2013, when Ted Cruz was counseling defunding Obamacare in the next budget, and Boehner wanted capitulation, Carly sided with...John Boehner.

Everybody could see this train wreck coming. I actually feel badly for John Boehner. I think this is Ted Cruz and President Obama’s shutdown. I think Ted Cruz’s tactics were wrong. There’s no honor in charging a hill that you know you can’t take, only casualties, although Ted Cruz maybe got name recognition and money along the way. But President Obama wanted this shutdown. And Ted Cruz played right into his hands.

Well, Boehner's "tactics," which ended up being employed, were to fully fund Obamacare, which is what we still have today. Carly was clearly against putting up a fight to defund Obamacare. What kind of a fighter will she be for limited government as president? Not very much of one, based on the evidence.

Carly supporters, please tell me why these comments are irrelevant and/or why views such as these have a statute of limitations of two years.

This article was produced by NewsMachete.com, the conservative news site.