Topics: David Brooks, Editor's Picks, Media crticism, New York Times, Religion, Life News, News

We are, it is generally recognized, suffering through an era of crises – political, civilizational, biological and environmental. Money has so perverted our electoral system that, according to Princeton University, we now live not in a democracy, but in an oligarchy. Republican senators, poisoned by partisan spleen, dispatch an unsolicited letter to the leaders of Iran and treasonously subvert President Obama’s bona fide negotiations to thwart the possibility of that country’s developing nuclear weapons. Islamist terrorists slaughter innocent cartoonists in the heart of Western Europe. Drug-resistant microbes threaten to leave us without effective antibiotics, and a once-rare hemorrhagic fever devastates entire swaths of West Africa. Climate change poses dangers to humanity’s future so grave that it worries the Pentagon and the European Union.

Anyone can browse the headlines and add even more troubles to the list. All these problems speak to the sad reversibility of hard-won progress, to our shattered political systems, to our vulnerability as a species before the caprices of nature, and, let’s face it, to the rank selfishness and out-and-out stupidity of our fellows. We already know how to deal with at least some of the above woes, but for a host of reasons, we find ourselves paralyzed, unable to do anything much but watch them worsen.

There are also less momentous concerns — societal ills in America, to be specific – to worry about, and these especially bother the New York Times columnist David Brooks. In a recent Op-Ed, “The Cost of Relativism,” he proposes a remedy. But he plays coy and does not tell you straight out what it is. So I will.

Brooks starts his column by decrying what he sees as our banes — single motherhood, slack parenting, a fall in church attendance, what once was called “juvenile delinquency,” and even clubbing and sex, all of which lead, as he puts it, to an “anarchy of intimate life” and “family breakdown.” A book by Harvard University professor Robert D. Putnam, “Our Kids,” arms him with the stats and anecdotes he needs to arrive at this judgment:

“The health of society is primarily determined by the habits and virtues of its citizens. In many parts of America there are no minimally agreed upon standards for what it means to be a father. There are no basic codes and rules woven into daily life, which people can absorb unconsciously and follow automatically.”

To set things right, Brooks proposes “reintroducing norms” – a task that will “require, first, a moral vocabulary.” Says he, a “plague of nonjudgmentalism” destroyed these norms, which “need repair up and down the scale, universally, together and all at once.” To accomplish this, we need, it follows, judgmentalism, a “holding everybody responsible.” We also need to be more “morally articulate,” and devise “clearer definitions of how we should be behaving at all levels.”

Such rectitudinous generalizations hardly warrant a response, but those familiar with Brooks’ work understand what the provenance of the aforementioned morality is likely to be, and that does deserve rebuttal. He hints at it, reminding us of times of “moral revival” when “behavior was tightened and norms reasserted.” He has in mind, he says, “England in the 1830s and . . . the U.S. amid economic stress in the 1930s.” He suggests we engage in an “organic communal effort, with voices from everywhere saying gently: This we praise. This we don’t.”

What in those two disparate, long-ago decades is to be emulated Brooks doesn’t say. But let’s think a bit. In the United States, the Stock Market Crash of 1929 brought to a quasi-apocalyptic close the famously fun, culturally effervescent rip-Roaring Twenties. I know of no “revival” in the decade that came afterward, nor do I see any moral tutelage Brooks would wish us to extract from one of the bleakest, most hardscrabble times in our history. Moreover, the repeal of Prohibition in 1933 constituted a triumph of rationalism and realism over the faith-besotted killjoys who helped get the restrictions on tipple passed into law 13 years earlier. Hardly “Brooksian,” that.

But what of “England in the 1830s”? The badass sensualist poet Lord Byron and his fellow atheist versifier Percy Bysshe Shelley had just tragically departed this world for the Eternal Void. The novelists Charlotte, Emily and Anne Brontë were coming of age, and would produce such wonders as “Jane Eyre,” “Wuthering Heights” and “The Tenant of Wildfell Hall.” Samuel Butler, author of “The Way of All Flesh” (a moving, must-read semi-autobiographical account of a journey from religious belief to atheism), was born.

None of this sounds very Brooksian either. But what must have been Brooks’ moment came in 1837, when a certain queen ascended the throne – a stern, pudgy, bedizened sourpuss by the name of Victoria, the standard-bearer, of course, of Victorian morality. Just Brooks’ kind of queen, we might think, though the discovery of her private passion for drawings of naked men eventually revealed her to be less of a wet blanket than was commonly understood.

In any case, Queen Victoria’s was a faith-infused epoch of flaunted piety and secret vice, and it would last 73 long, dreary years. The Anglican Church set moral standards for the time, yet as might be expected under the stifling atmosphere religion fosters, prostitution flourished. Victorians, especially upper-class ones, felt such shame at their bodies that during beach vacations they entered the sea in clunky “bathing machines”; homosexuality was a capital offense; and extramarital sex and masturbation were so frowned upon that widows turned to the family doctor for “pelvic” (that is, clitoral) “massages” in order to relieve themselves of their “hysteria.” (The invention of the vibrator toward the end of Victoria’s term in office greatly reduced the time necessary for such “treatment.”) And of course children toiled away in Dickensian poverty, prey to beatings and other abuse by their factory bosses.

The only bright spot – and it was a considerable one – came in 1859, when Darwin’s “On the Origin of Species” hit the bookstands and accelerated humanity’s journey away from the practice of sacred superstitions and belief in magic books toward truth and science, progress and light.