x of x An Afghan honor guard stands next to pictures of former Vice President Mohammed Fahim outside his house Monday in Kabul, Afghanistan. Fahim, a commander during the anti-Soviet war and an anti-Taliban leader in the 1990s, died Sunday at age 57. Afghan President Hamid Karzai said Fahim’s death is “a huge loss for Afghanistan.” Anja Niedringhaus/AP

x of x A girl stands next to a sign at Kuala Lumpur International Airport Monday in Sepang, Malaysia. The search for a Malaysia Airlines flight carrying 239 people that's been missing since Saturday has involved 34 aircraft and 40 ships from several countries.

Daniel Chan/AP

x of x Visitors stand at the deserted Okawa Elementary School on Monday in Ishinomaki, Japan, where scores of students went missing following the 2011 tsunami. Tuesday marks the third anniversary of the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear disaster known as "3.11" that killed 15,884 people and left 2,636 unaccounted for. Shizuo Kambayashi/AP

x of x Former imprisoned Russian tycoon Mikhail Khodorkovsky speaks to journalists during a roundtable discussion at a hotel Monday in Kiev, Ukraine. Khodorkovsky said in a lecture to students at Kiev Polytechnic University Monday that Russia is ruining its longstanding friendship with Ukraine by its aggressive and pro-separatist actions in Crimea. David Azia/AP

x of x A Crimean Tatar man prays at a mosque Monday in Bakhchysarai, Ukraine. The arrival of Russian troops in Crimea has opened old wounds among the Crimean Tatars, who were, as Muslims, deported by Joseph Stalin from Russia during World War II. Vadim Ghirda/AP

x of x Men attend a two-day forum entitled "Promoting Peace in Muslim Societies" on Sunday in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Karim Sahib/AFP/Getty Images

x of x Children watch as U.S. Army Spc. Wilmer Bolivar of Pembroke Pines, Fla., patrols through a village on Sunday near Kandahar, Afghanistan. Scott Olson/Getty Images

x of x Stephanie Jallen of the United States races to win bronze medal in women's alpine skiing at the 2014 Sochi Winter Paralympics on Monday in Russia. Dmitry Lovetsky/AP

x of x Claudia Breidbach, right, demonstrates her bionic hand, steerable by a mobile phone or iPod via Bluetooth, to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, left, and British Prime Minister David Cameron during the opening day of the computer fair CeBIT on Monday in Hanover, Germany. Frank Augstein/AP

x of x Policemen detain an exiled Tibetan during a protest outside the Chinese Embassy on Monday in Katmandu, Nepal, on the anniversary of a failed 1959 uprising against Chinese rule in Tibet. Niranjan Shrestha/AP