There’s one Rockies streak that goes back further than the team’s nine consecutive losses. And the Rockies can live with this one.

Nick Hundley extended his hitting streak to 12 games Sunday with an RBI single off Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw.

“I’d rather have a 12-game winning streak,” Hundley said.

The veteran catcher is batting .415 in his career-best hitting streak, which includes two home runs, a triple and three doubles. His eight RBIs over that span account for 17 percent of the Rockies’ runs.

“I feel comfortable at the plate. I’m swinging at the pitches I want to swing at,” Hundley said. “If the results come, they come. But I’m in a place I want to be.”

RELATED: Paige: The curse of Monfort is ruining the Colorado Rockies

Miami’s Dee Gordon has a 13-game hitting streak after going 2-for-4 against the Giants on Sunday. Gordon and Dodgers third baseman Juan Uribe have the longest hitting streaks this year.

Hundley said he received a phone call from Rockies hitting coach Blake Doyle soon after signing with the team in January. Doyle helped Hundley fine-tune his mechanics as a hitter.

“He had some really good ideas for me,” Hundley said.

Hundley’s hit against Kershaw, a three-time National League Cy Young Award winner, was perhaps his most difficult.

“You’re not going to get very many mistakes when he’s out there,” said Hundley, who is hitting .342 overall.

Makeup set. The Rockies-Dodgers game Saturday, which was rained out, will be played June 2 at 1 p.m. as part of a split doubleheader at Coors Field.

Tickets from Saturday are valid for that makeup game, or ticket holders can exchange for another home game.

Footnotes. LaTroy Hawkins, on the disabled list since April 22 with right biceps tendinitis, will need at least one minor-league rehab appearance before returning, Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. … Eddie Butler, who was hit in the shin by a line drive Friday, said his swollen leg is fine and he won’t miss a start. … The Orioles claimed right-handed reliever Jorge Rondon off waivers. The Rockies designated him for assignment May 2. Nick Groke, The Denver Post

Looking ahead

Monday: Off

Tuesday: Rockies’ Kyle Kendrick (1-4, 8.73 ERA) at Angels’ C.J. Wilson (1-2, 2.70), 8:05 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (2-3, 4.42) at Angels’ Hector Santiago (2-2, 2.57), 8:05 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Rockies’ Eddie Butler (2-3, 3.73) at Dodgers’ TBA, 8:10 p.m., ROOT