Tahsa Goin, 26, stands outside Stonehedge Place apartments Friday. Goin, who lives in her grandparents' house with her baby daughter, said she would like to find a place of her own to rent but can't afford anything on the market in Longmont. ( Karen Antonacci/ Longmont Times-Call )

Tasha Goin, 26, is waiting.

On Friday afternoon, she waited outside a Stonehedge Place apartment for her car to stop malfunctioning so she could take her 10-month-old daughter home. She had just finished a shift at a local fast food restaurant that began at 3:30 a.m.

Goin is also waiting for a permanent place at Stonehedge, a private apartment complex that offers government-subsidized rents to low-income residents and where Goin's babysitter lives.

So far, after a year and a half on the waitlist, Goin said she isn't sure if a spot will ever open up for them.

For the meantime, Goin said she and her daughter are staying with Goin's grandparents. But as her daughter continues to crawl, Goin said she wants a place of their own where the girl can walk and run around.

While she calls occasionally to inquire about homes for rent in Longmont, it's a seller's market and she hasn't found anything that doesn't vastly exceed the money she's saved out of her $9.50-an-hour paychecks.

"I'm a single parent and I can't afford hardly anything," Goin said. "It's almost everywhere, not just Longmont. Broomfield I think may be hit the hardest. There's hardly anybody living on their own nowadays because you need two or more incomes to make it."

Longmont growing fast in population, employment

On Tuesday, the Longmont City Council will take up the issue of affordable housing — or rather, the lack of it.

Advertisement

Kathy Fedler, the city's housing and community investment manager, will present updated findings to the council Tuesday that drive home the urgency of affordable housing in Longmont.

Longmont is growing fast, in terms of population and employment. With a population of 90,227 people in 2013, the city is forecasted to reach 116,076 people by 2034, according to the Colorado Department of Local Affairs data.

Although Longmont is growing at a faster rate than surrounding communities, the city's median household income has increased by 15 percent from 2000 to 2013, the lowest increase among a list of 10 nearby cities and towns. In comparison, the median household income in Boulder grew by 26 percent, Firestone by 43 percent and Greeley by 27 percent. Statewide, the median household income increased by 24 percent over that time period.

Additionally, Fedler said, the conventional wisdom that people who are priced out of Boulder County settle in nearby communities doesn't hold up.

While the average sales price of a home in Longmont is $250,000, the median household income can only afford $212,900 with a gap of $37,250. If a household takes that same $212,900 to Erie, Firestone, Fort Collins, Frederick or Loveland, they will likely still face a gap ranging from $6,100 in Loveland to $122,100 in Erie.

Only in Dacono and Greeley does $212,900 exceed the average home sale price, according to the Longmont study.

An equitable solution difficult to find

People in Longmont in search of a home "are going to have go even farther out than we normally thought," Fedler said.

Faced with this problem, staff are asking the city council two important questions — what should our goal be and how do we get there?

From 1995 to 2011, the city had what was called inclusionary zoning in which residential developments over a certain size were required to provide 10 percent of their housing stock as affordable or pay the money in lieu to the affordable housing program.

City Council repealed inclusionary zoning in 2011, when the housing market was depressed. Then-council members expressed concern that the program unfairly burdened developers when there was an ample amount of foreclosed-upon housing for sale at low prices.

The only council members to serve on that 2011 council and the current one — Gabe Santos and Sarah Levison — fell on opposite sides of the vote. Santos's was one of the four votes that passed the repeal while Levison's vote made up the three that opposed it.

"It was getting rid of something that was working," Levison said Friday. "We had nothing to replace it with and the real challenge is one we inherited from (that vote). We're finding it incredibly difficult to do something that's equitable and that's going to be working for the community."

In Boulder, where even higher home prices are creating similar affordability concerns, the city already has a similar measure in place and recently approved an affordable housing fee to be collected on all types of commercial development, not just residential.

Levison said that instead of reinstituting the inclusionary zoning as it was or tacking on an affordable housing sales tax, she would prefer putting aside a percentage of building permit fee revenues to address the problem.

Building permit fees are levied on any construction in the city, ranging from new residential or commercial development to work on existing homes.

"That way if you're building another bedroom or something,you would be helping to build a bedroom for someone else in the city too," Levison said.

Santos did not return calls seeking comment.

As for Goin, she said she hopes the city addresses the problem.

"They could do something so rent is less so people who don't have a place of their own can make it on their own," Goin said. "So you could do good for yourself and get up on your own two feet."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci