Are you thinking about tax day yet?

Tax preparers say you should because this is the first year that the Affordable Care Act will show up on your tax form.

10TV first met Attorney Maurice Thompson in March 2012.

Thompson told us then as an attorney, who runs a Constitutional Rights Firm that focuses on freedom of choice, he would not sign up for government health insurance.

10TV met up with him Wednesday and found he was still standing firm in his choice.

"That has not changed,” said Maurice Thompson “I have not had health insurance for seven years."

As a result, when Thompson files his taxes for 2014 he will be hit with a penalty.

"The penalty for me would be about $1,000," said Thompson.

Tax preparers says proof of insurance is the single-largest change to the tax code in decades, and they've spent hours preparing to help you through it.

"There were lots of classes. I will not lie, there were lots and lots of classes,” said Columbus-area H&R Block Office Manager Angie Schoen.

Schoen says for most people, who get insurance through work, the change will be simple.

They check a box on their tax form that says they had health insurance all year.

However, if you were uninsured last year, the penalty is $95 per person or one percent of your yearly income, whichever is greater.

For 2015, the penalty is $325 or two percent of your income.

Schoen says do not wait until the last minute to file.

"I would rather people know they owe the money and have a few months to plan, because they don't have to pay it until April 15,” said Schoen. “And also with the budget cuts with the IRS, and it taking 21 days to get their refund, it's better to get it in as soon as possible."

Maurice Thompson says it is his responsibility to engage in civil disobedience to disobey what he sees as an unjust law.

Thompson says he will deal with the change in tax code in a way that makes sense to him.

"I'm simply not going to pay the penalty when I file my taxes on April 15th,” said Thompson.

And says he'll remain uninsured.

Tax preparers say refusing to pay the penalty is no different than refusing to pay taxes, and the IRS will treat it the same.

If you want to avoid those penalties next year, keep in mind the deadline to sign up for insurance is February 15.



More Information - Affordable Care Act Website