Photo

To the Editor:

Re “A Cancer Battle We Can Win,” by Andrea McKee and Andrew Salner (Op-Ed, Sept. 22):

Certainly screening for lung cancer in select populations has proved its value and deserves to be covered by Medicare, but readers should understand the long and controversial history of this procedure.

When it was first proposed, the concern was that smokers might get the idea that it was safe to smoke and be screened regularly. Pressure from health advocates compelled the researchers to include smoking cessation counseling for the participants of early trials. Then it was revealed that some of the early work was sponsored by a tobacco company.

As for winning the battle, reducing the number of lung cancer deaths by 20 percent may be significant, but we already know how to reduce the number of lung cancer deaths by 90 percent — regulate cigarettes out of existence. All the steps required have been mapped out by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the 2014 Surgeon General’s Report. We just need to persuade some politicians to act.

EDWARD ANSELM

New York, Sept. 22, 2014

The writer is medical director of Health Republic Insurance of New Jersey and an assistant professor of medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

To the Editor:

I encourage smokers and former smokers to seek out more information about the benefits and risks of lung cancer screening, then make an informed choice about what is right for them.

Here are some additional facts and issues to consider (drawn partly from an excellent Veterans Affairs publication called “Screening for Lung Cancer”):

■ The evidence for benefit is based on a single, carefully conducted trial. It is unclear if the benefits shown in this trial will be replicated in routine practice.

■ The benefit of screening is small but important. According to research, with screening, three fewer people out of 1,000 would die from lung cancer over six years compared with those electing not to be screened.

■ Potential harms: Of 1,000 people screened over three years, 365 would have a false alarm. The false alarms would lead to additional testing, and a few people would experience serious complications from this testing.

■ Only 25 percent of participants in the trial were older than 65, and none were older than 74. False positive rates and the complications from biopsies of lung nodules are higher in older adults. The potential benefit from lung cancer screening in older adults may be substantially less than observed in the trial.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While it is laudable that some hospitals provide CT screening free to all qualified high-risk individuals, patients will need good insurance for further testing and treatment if they have a positive test. I am not arguing for or against screening, but rather that people should have the facts and discuss with their physician what is best for them.

JOHN WILLIAMS

Chapel Hill, N.C., Sept. 22, 2014

The writer, an internist, is a professor of medicine at Duke University Medical Center.

To the Editor:

As a supporter of the Affordable Care Act, I find Andrea McKee and Andrew Salner’s Op-Ed essay both hopeful and worrisome. They report significantly improved lung cancer survival rates for “current and former heavy smokers” who have a CT scan that costs several hundred dollars. They add that the “screenings will be more affordable” when the Affordable Care Act lists them as free preventive services in January 2015. They urge Medicare to follow suit.

But individual affordability means shared expense. The writers note the estimated nine million beneficiaries, but not the collective cost of perhaps $3 billion or more based on their figures. As the Affordable Care Act increases our shared responsibilities for one another’s health care costs, perhaps we should limit “free” (that is, jointly paid) preventive services to cases involving a common health risk rather than a recognized personal risk.

DAVID CRAIG

Indianapolis, Sept. 23, 2014

The writer is the author of “Health Care as a Social Good: Religious Values and American Democracy.”