If you go What: Boulder Ballet presents Ballet in the Park When and where • 7 p.m. today: Broomfield Amphitheater, 3 Community Park Road, Broomfield • 7:30 p.m. Saturday: Civic Green Amphitheater, 9370 S. Ridgeline Blvd., Highlands Ranch • 7 p.m. Sunday, June 21: Central Park Bandshell, 13th and Canyon Boulevard, Boulder Tickets: Free Info: boulderballet.org

As the Boulder Ballet launches its 11th annual Ballet in the Park today, a staple with the dance company will be launching in a different direction.

Peter Davison had become a well-known face with the local group, mostly because of his quirky, unusual vaudeville performances fused with his training as a professional dancer.

He juggles unusual objects, such as plastic bags. He's a unicycle master. He balances on chairs and tables in seemingly gravity-defying ways. He dances on trash cans and tells stories without saying a word, through movement that simultaneously feels like a hark back to the silent movie era, and a glimpse into the future of contemporary dance.

Nobody dances quite like Davison.

But starting this weekend, he's taking those movements beyond Boulder's borders.

While ballet dancers take to the outdoor stage at the Broomfield Amphitheater today, Davison will be taking the stage at the Chicago Contemporary Circus Festival, his first gig as an independent, traveling performer in a new chapter of his career.

Davison resigned from the Boulder Ballet as co-artistic director for more than 10 years. He served with Ana Claire, who now will serve as solo artistic director.

Peter Davison's act includes a variety of props, including a unicycle and bowling pins. (Jonathan Castner / For the Camera)

Claire will be assisted by two new leaders: Lance Hardin was appointed the new associate artistic director; his wife, Amy Earnest, will work as the new assistant school director. The couple have served since 2012 as co-dance directors at the Myles Reif Performing Arts Center in Grand Rapids, Minn.

The three of them will be involved in replacing a man whose history with the ballet is extensive. He has been involved with production and leadership since 1986. He has served in every role imaginable — performer, webmaster, marketing director, teacher, graphic designer — and was the executive director from 2005 to 2010.

Since he took his first class there in the 1980s, he says the Boulder Ballet has changed from being a semi-pro "pick-up company" to a full-time, esteemed professional company. Since Davison and Claire took the reins in 2004, the company has tripled in size and doubled annual performances.

"Behind the scenes has gotten stronger through the learning process of getting to where we are now: a very strong organization all the way around," Davison says.

That's, in part, why he feels now is the time for him to move on.

Claire says she is excited to see where Davison goes and also is eager for some new, fresh perspectives at the ballet. Although she says she will miss working with Davison after so many years, she doesn't expect the change to drastically alter the company.

"I think the community will still get what they expect. It might be a little fresher, because it'll be two other people, but it'll still be the Boulder Ballet, in that it's eclectic and full of humor and theater," Claire says. "It is still the same quirky, wonderful, fun ballet company that it's always been, what set us apart."

And Davison says it's time for him to return to his roots in circus, which he infused into Boulder Ballet choreography to help earn its reputation as a creative and nontraditional dance company.

Davison is ready to focus on his one-man show exclusively now.

"The time is right to really pursue that art form that's more deeply in my bones," he says.

Lance Hardin is the new associate artistic director of the Boulder Ballet, and his wife, Amy Earnest, is the new assistant school director. (Courtesy photo)

Davison started juggling when he was 12, self-taught from a book in the library. His career actually began on the streets, as a busker in Los Angeles. He moved to Boulder in the late '70s to busk here, amid the "heyday of street performers," before he enrolled in a dance class at Boulder Ballet. He juggled his way up to the top.

His vision stretches even further now.

He plans to tour the nation with his vaudeville show, although Boulder will remain his home base. Eventually, he says, he wants to begin teaching his "dancing with objects art form" and open a specialized performance company.

"It's an unusual field," he says.

Dance companies that perform with objects tend to be more acrobatic or dance-focused, where the props are only secondary. Circus groups tend to perfect certain skills but treat dance as a sideline, a way to move between skills.

He says he doesn't know of a company that gives dance and object manipulation equal emphasis.

"It's tough to do," Davison says. "It's two art forms that take a huge amount of training each. First, I will explore that in a one-man show format."

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay