Editorial cartoon (Photo: Andy Marlette/Pensacola News Journal)

False text

The Republicans in Congress have hit a new low by putting the text of the flawed Planned Parenthood video into the hearing record. Every fact checker has ruled the video to be misleading and false. These men are smart and know the the video is a well-groomed lie. Oh, but there are votes to be had. Let the truth be damned. When asked if this text should go into the record as certified to be true, there was a long pause, as advisers scrambled to find “some kind of answer.” The answer was that the text was certified to be a true example of what was seen by the public. In the end, the Republicans in our Congress put a false text in the Congressional Record of the United States, knowing full well that “evidence” was a lie, produced to misinform, confuse and misdirect the American people.

- Bill A Beaumont, south Fort Myers

Bad Iran deal

In the beginning, I wasn’t sure if the Iran deal was a good deal or not, because the English Prime Minister and the German Chancellor said it was a good deal. But when Prime Minister Netanyahu said it was a bad deal, I decided to believe him. Nobody is more effected like Israel. There is one thing I totally don’t understand. President Barack Obama had a lot of leverage but four innocent Americans are still in captivity. For me, that’s a war crime committed by President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry. Remember the cold war? Eleven million out of 22 million Syrians are homeless and President Vladimir Putin just sold a lot of weapons to Syria to destabilize the mid east further. That guy is not a friend of the west or the U.S.

- Manfred von Hassel, south Fort Myers

Ballot security needed

Your opinion piece Aug. 11 on Harrington ADA purchase (Responsibility on Harrington to provide plan) states: “Lee County Clerk of Court, which is looking at policies and procedures.” I asked the clerk audit department how the audit was going.

I expected an audit on all operations but find it is only on purchasing. The clerk’s office can only audit what Harrington allows them to. What needs to be watched is early voting procedures, ballot handling, and proper identification being used.

Ballot security, are they left at early voting site all 10 days or are they securely transported to elections storage every day? What happens at night? Ballots should be secured in the order cast. Someone sorts them by precinct which destroys chain of evidence in case of fraud investigation.

We need poll watchers.

- Steve Crane, Cape Coral

Home run for disabled voters

On Tuesday, the Board of County Commissioners voted to spend the money necessary to purchase the Expressvote machines for the 2016 primaries. Now voters with disabilities will have the opportunity to vote independently and by secret ballot. The commissioners did what they always do, chose inclusion and integration for those of us challenged by vision loss rather than segregation and exclusion.

Yes, definitely a home run for voters with disabilities. Once again, I am reminded how forward thinking and inclusive Lee County is.

- Mary Ann Grignon, president, Southwest Florida Council of the Blind, Cape Coral

Bear hunt a joke

Hunters and concerned Floridians shouldn’t be blamed for this trophy bear hunt approved by the FWC on Sept. 1. There are 3,200 bears in the four designated kill areas. As of Sept. 3, there were over 2,000 applicants. The problem in Central Florida is due to human encroachment. The FWC stated that this kill would not solve the problem. The term harvest/hunt is a joke. This trophy bear kill is being used for money and ego. I would urge hunters and concerned Floridians to call the Governor and stop this slaughter.

- Sonja Fitch, Jacksonville Beach

Fool me twice

Why are the U.S. taxpayers giving this organization over half a billion dollars every year?

The Democrats claim the Republicans are causing a war on women’s health. The founder of Planned Parenthood was a racist and wanted to exterminate the black race. The majority of Planned Parenthood abortions are minorities and then they turn around and sell the body parts for profit.

Also how can this be a war on women’s health? I thought all the Democrats and President Obama claimed that Obamacare would take care of everybody’s health care issues!

Do you think we might have been lied to, I mean misled again?

- Ray Uryga, Cape Coral

This vote really counts

The next presidential election will be the most important for the middle class and the poor since the last election George W. Bush won 15 years ago. This time, the vote really matters if we want change in Washington or not. If we get scared and vote for the usual suspects we will see no change at all because the elite big businesses and lobbyists will take over and the usual suspects will bow to them and turn their backs on the regular people. We will continue to borrow money and spend ourselves into oblivion and only the super rich will survive. That’s what I see now and that’s why Donald Trump has the trump card. If we play it we have a chance and if we fold like the cowards we have shown ourselves to be we will only get the same as usual-a lot of inspiring words with no meaning.

- Roger McHose, Cape Coral

A message to school board

Dear School Board members,

A noted leader in a community was in the Village Square when a detractor called out and challenged this person saying: “Wise leader, I have a baby bird in my hand. Is it a live bird or a dead one?” The leader thinks: “If I say it is dead, the detractor will release it and prove me wrong, but if I say it is alive, the detractor will crush it and prove me wrong.” The wise leader pauses and as he scans the anticipatory crowd, he answers: “The answer is in your hands!”

Please be a wise leader and do the same. Make haste, slowly!

- The Rev. Robert Browning, rector emeritus, St Hilary’s Episcopal Church, Fort Myers

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1FanUR3