Ebola U.S.A.

After a patient in Dallas tested positive for Ebola, CDC Director Dr. Tom Frieden said in an evening news conference, "This is the first case of Ebola diagnosed in the U.S., and the first case of this strain of Ebola diagnosed outside Africa." Frieden sought to reassure the public, stating "I have no doubt ... this case of Ebola ... will not spread widely in this country." CBS News chief medical correspondent Dr. Jon LaPook reported only those with direct contact with the patient or his fluids could possibly contract Ebola. Frieden acknowledged it was possible that "a handful" of people in close contact with the patient may have been exposed.

Ebola neglect?

If Ebola spreads, it could join a host of other issues like the civil war in Syria or the Russian incursion in Ukraine in which President Obama is accused of allowing a problem to worsen beyond control by failing to address it quickly enough?

Christie unloads

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie blasted the president's handling of the ISIS threat, in an interview with "CBS This Morning" co-host Gayle King. She asked Christie about comments he made in Wisconsin this week, referencing President Obama's "60 Minutes" interview with Steve Kroft that aired Sunday. Christie cited Mr. Obama's admission that the U.S. intelligence community had underestimated ISIS. Christie also talks with King about his weight loss and possibilities for an Oval office run in 2016.

No holiday

Protesters, many of them students and young people, continued to jam Hong Kong's streets today. As CBS News correspondent Seth Doane reports, today is "National Day" in China -- a holiday that many people have off from work -- and crowds were growing.

Another security lapse

A security contractor convicted three times on charges of assault and battery was allowed on an elevator with President Obama earlier this month, CBS News senior White House correspondent Bill Plante has confirmed - adding another tally to a score of headaches that have recently besieged the U.S. Secret Service. Even worse, the agency was unaware that the contractor had a gun when he was in the elevator with the president.

Bankers walk

When future historians write about Attorney General Eric Holder's tenure leading the Justice Department, one topic sure to get much discussion is why no high-ranking bankers connected to the financial crisis were brought up on criminal charges. Under Holder's leadership, Justice has collected billions in fines through civil actions and gotten two banks to plead guilty to criminal charges, but few charges have been leveled against top Wall Street executives.

Pipe bombs

Investigators searching the dense woods of Pennsylvania's Pocono Mountains for the suspect in the deadly ambush of state troopers have found two "fully functional" pipe bombs that are believed to have been left behind by the suspect, officials said yesterday.

Youth concussions

Doctors are starting to sound alarm bells on what they see as a disturbing trend -- unjustified fear of concussions -- that's causing a sharp decline in kids participating in sports. As CBS News correspondent Jan Crawford reports, they say this is in part because of media hype, and some doctors say not participating in sports is much more harmful to kids long-term than a concussion.

Healthcare.gov anniversary

One year after the disastrous launch of Healthcare.gov, the federal website that serves as the Obamacare hub for dozens of states, the views on the 2010 health care law are decidedly mixed. According to a CBS News/New York Times poll released two weeks ago, 51 percent of Americans disapprove of the Affordable Care Act while 41 percent approve. Here is a look at how it has performed.

Top News

World

More bodies pulled from ash at Japan volcano

Jamaica drafts marijuana decriminalization bill

Imprisoned Dutch killer van der Sloot now a father

Politics

Clintons tag-team mid-term events after granddaughter's birth

GOP slams Sen. Mark Udall on ISIS

Ron Paul: Scotland's secessionist movement should inspire U.S.

Jimmy Carter turns 90: a look back

U.S.

After nearly three decades, K.C. Royals win thriller in return to baseball's playoffs

Feds: NFL's TV "blackout" rule unsportsmanlike

Wife of slain Bell Gardens, Calif. mayor released

Tracy Morgan: "Can't believe" Walmart blaming him for crash injuries

MoneyWatch

Skipping Windows 9 to Windows 10

Californians: Plastic bag ban no big deal

The campaign against paperless tickets

Customers say Coin is shortchanging them

Health

EMS crew in Dallas Ebola case put in isolation

Boston Children's Hospital treating patients with polio-like symptoms