Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump signs autographs after speaking to campaign supporters, Saturday, Oct. 3, 2015, in Franklin, Tenn. (AP Photo/Mark Zaleski)

(CNSNews.com) - Republican tycoon Donald Trump says he fights "like hell" to pay as little in taxes as possible.



"I mean, I fight because that's a very big expense," Trump told ABC's "This Week" with George Stephanopoulos. "And one of the problems and one of the reasons I fight so hard is because I hate the way our country is spending my money and everybody else's money."

Trump said "at some point," he'll release his tax returns:



"But I pay as little as possible, I'm very proud to tell you. And I will say this, if this country were properly run, where the money wasn't in shambles, where the deals that they make aren't the Iran deal, where we're giving Iran $150 billion dollars and the deal is a disaster in every single possible way, where everything we do is bad, including ObamaCare, which is, by the way, the premiums are up 55 percent for some people.



"If our country was properly run, I'd almost feel much better about it, and so would a lot of other people."



Stephanopoulos argued that Trump's tax plan, announced last month, would benefit Trump personally, because it lowers the top tax rate and reduces the tax on investments.



"Everybody's going to save, according to my plan, and that money -- you know where that money's going?" Trump asked.



"That means you're not going to be ...paying more taxes though," Stephanopoulos interrupted.



"That money is going back into other things," Trump explained.



"But you're going to get a tax cut?" Stephanopoulos continued.



"I think that probably I'll end up paying more under this," Trump responded. "If you look at all of the kinds of deductions that people are allowed to take, that you're not going to be taking anymore, including carried interest, that's just one of them, I think I probably don't do as well."



Stephanopoulos, undeterred, noted that Trump's family would benefit from Trump's plan to eliminate the estate tax.



"Well, the estate tax is a different thing," Trump said. "The estate tax is a very, very horrible weapon that has destroyed many families. In particular, farms and things where they make an income and they have a certain value and they have to go out and borrow money and they put mortgages on their farms...



Trump said the estate tax is a "double taxation" for families who already have paid taxes on the assets they own.



"Bottom line, you do accept that you are going to make out well under your tax plan?" Stephanopoulos asked Trump.



"I don't know," Trump said. "I mean if the economy is good, if the economy is great, everybody makes out well, so."