Migraines from Gum, ACA Delays, and the Perfect Chocolate Chip Cookie

Doctors Give Moms Everywhere an Excuse to Nix Gum

I don’t know about you, but when I was growing up my mother absolutely hated chewing gum, and tried to stop me from getting it at every possible chance. This was probably because it would invariably end up in my hair, or anywhere else that wasn’t my mouth, but a new study from Tel Aviv University in Israel suggests that chewing gum may give kids and teenagers headaches, Business Standard reports. Thirty kids with headaches agreed to stop chewing gum for a month, and as a result, 19 said their headaches disappeared.

The researchers speculate it may have something to do with either the motion of chewing and jaw pressure, or with the high levels of aspartame in the gum. Either way, others everywhere rejoiced.

Breast Cancer Divide: The Racial Gap

The war on cancer, and the particularly aggressive pink ribbon campaign that raises awareness for breast cancer, has resulted in increased screening and declining death rates for the disease, but a troubling racial gap exists between white and black women, the New York Times reports. Black women are more likely to be diagnosed when the disease is more advanced, and are also far more likely to die from the disease. One fact from the data-rich piece: a black woman diagnosed with breast cancer will die an average of three years earlier than her white counterpart.

Doctors and Parents Disagree on Definition of Death

We mentioned the tragic story of 13-year-old Jahi McMath’s tonsil-removing surgery that somehow went wrong on Monday – somehow the routine surgery ended with Jahi bleeding intensely and being declared brain dead by her doctors. Her family, however, isn’t quite ready to let go, the San Francisco Chronicle reports. The family is asking that she be kept on life support until after Christmas, and that she be given a feeding tube rather than a sugar drip, but doctors are saying they’ve declared her dead and the family needs to accept the situation. It’s still unclear exactly what went wrong during the surgery, but CNN has a breakdown of the failure rate for routine surgeries.

40 Percent of American Adults Clock Less Than 7 Hours of Sleep

A new Gallup poll reveals that 40 percent of American adults are getting less than the recommended 7 to 9 hours of nightly sleep. A full 84 percent of adults got adequate sleep in 1942, a number that’s been on the decline ever since. The average night’s sleep is down to 6.8 hours, and many Americans admit that they’d feel better if they devoted more time to ZZZs.

ACA Sees More Delays, But Docs Have Faith

The roll out of the Affordable Care Act and the problems that have plagued the website is just the mess that keeps on giving —yesterday, Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius announced in letter that anyone whose insurance had been cancelled due to the ACA would be exempt from the penalty imposed on those without insurance.

The twists and turns that have accompanied the first few months of the law have complicated an already complex piece of legislation, but healthcare providers haven’t lost faith. According to a recent survey, 93 percent of hospital executives think the ACA will improve healthcare, The Washington Posts’ Wonkblog reports. The execs were even more positive when asked how it would help their own hospitals improve quality and cost reform.

The Perfect Chocolate Chip Cookie

Looking to make a perfect chocolate chip cookie to round out your holiday plate, or offer up to Santa? Kenji Lopez spent months baking 1,536 cookies to find the most perfect one, according to science. Check out his advice at Serious Eats.

-Susan E. Matthews, Everyday Health Staff Writer