hamptoncreekfoods.com Hampton Creek Foods’ egg-free condiment, Just Mayo.

Imagine eating raw cookie dough without fear of ingesting campylobacter, salmonella or the avian influenza virus?

Hampton Creek Foods Inc. has raised $23 million in Series B financing for plant-based food technology that replaces eggs in foods, from a simple scramble to muffins, cookie dough and condiments.

Li Ka-shing’s Horizons Ventures led the round, joined by AME Cloud Ventures, individual angel investors (including sustainable food and farming advocates Ali and Hadi Partovi, and Google Inc.’s Jessica Powell) along with the company’s earlier institutional backers Collaborative Fund, Eagle Cliff and Khosla Ventures.

The San Francisco company has raised a total of $30 million in funding to date, according to Chief Executive and co-founder Josh Tetrick, including from Bill Gates and Peter Thiel’s Founders Fund.

The company is taking on “chicken eggs,” he said, with products it makes from non-GMO plants. The company’s aim is to offer products that taste as good or better than their egg-based counterparts, that are cheaper to use, better for diners’ health, and far better for the environment than intensive animal agriculture practices that produce the majority of the 1.8 trillion eggs laid globally each year.

The company’s first product was an egg alternative called Beyond Eggs (for Food Manufacturers) that Hampton Creek sold in bulk, 50-pound packs to major food manufacturers.

But more recently, Hampton Creek has struck a distribution deal with Whole Foods Market Inc. for its first mainstream consumer product Just Mayo. The startup also works with a number of other large groceries, fast food chains, convenience stores and major food manufacturers, who are selling or using Just Mayo, Mr. Tetrick said.

Hampton Creek plans to use its funding to grow its manufacturing operations, fulfill orders, strike new distribution deals, and to expand significantly beyond the U.S., especially in China. That’s one reason the company sought funding from Li Ka-shing’s Horizons Ventures, Mr. Tetrick said.

The CEO said he also expects one-third to one-half of the new funding to go towards research and development of new products that would replace eggs in a variety of food items.

hamptoncreekfoods.com Left to right: Hampton Creek Foods’ Johan Boot (VP of R&D) and Josh Tetrick (CEO)

According to Collaborative Fund Venture Partner Kanyi Maqubela, the firm sees Hampton Creek as the “biggest possible consumer play there is, given that food is this pervasive, universal need.”

He expects the company to focus on distribution, keeping its supply chain efficient and competitive in 2014, and building international brand awareness.

Mr. Tetrick noted that the global market for mayo alone every year, according to Euromonitor International Ltd. reports, tops $11 billion. He added that there are 79 billion eggs laid in the U.S. alone each year, and one-third of them wind up “living inside” of products like cookies, muffins and other doughy delights, where consumers aren’t aware of them.

“We want to make eggs obsolete,” the CEO said. “Most people would be appalled if they saw where the eggs in their favorite foods are coming from…and the treatment of chickens in this intensive, animal agriculture system.”

Venture investments in food rose in 2013. General food products attracted at least $47.3 million in institutional funding last year, according to Dow Jones VentureSource data, about a 22% increase over the $38.7 million invested in the category in 2012.

Write to Lora Kolodny at lora.kolodny@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @lorakolodny