— Joseph "Jay" Leeson, a former Bethlehem councilman and solicitor, and three other federal judicial nominees from Pennsylvania on Thursday faced questions from a Senate panel in their first public examination since being named last month.

The generally cordial hearing included a query to Leeson, 59, of Bethlehem, about a critical comment he made regarding the Affordable Care Act during a June 2012 forum.

During the Diocese of Allentown event, Leeson used the words "un-American" and "blatantly unconstitutional" in discussing the federal health care law known as Obamacare and its mandate on contraception coverage.

When Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, the Senate Judiciary Committee's ranking member, asked him about the remark, Leeson said he was speaking on behalf of the diocese, which is one of his clients. But he added that the term un-American "was not an appropriate use of words on my part."

"There's nothing in my personal beliefs or my faith that would prevent me from applying and upholding all precedents, without exception, of the United States Supreme Court and the 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals," said Leeson, who was joined at the hearing by his wife and three of his children.

If confirmed by the Senate Judiciary Committee and full Senate for the $199,100-a-year position, Leeson would join U.S. District Judge James Knoll Gardner in Allentown's federal courthouse. Former Northampton County Judge Edward Smith currently also is based at the Allentown courthouse, but is slated to eventually move to Easton.

Born in Allentown, Leeson graduated from DeSales University in Center Valley and Catholic University of America School of Law in Washington, D.C.

He served on Bethlehem City Council from 2004 to 2009, had been solicitor for Mayor Don Cunningham and before that, City Council. As a councilman, Leeson, a Democrat, pushed for more financial oversight of city spending and opposed a casino coming to Bethlehem.

He has worked with other municipalities, including Bangor and East Allen Township, and has been an arbitrator for the American Arbitration Association since 1981.

Neither Leeson nor the other Pennsylvania nominees considered Thursday have experience on the bench. Russell Carparelli, executive director of the American Judicature Society, said that while his group has not collected data on the experience level of federal judges, it is not unusual for nominees to have never served as a judge.

During Thursday's committee hearing, Sens. Bob Casey Jr., D-Pa., and Pat Toomey, R-Pa., praised Leeson's background. Although nominated by the president, judicial candidates normally enjoy the support of senators from their state.

Toomey described him as a respected lawyer with ample experience in litigation, municipal law, and nonprofit and religious law. "His commitment to public service is exemplary," Toomey said.

Leeson also has been active in local and state Democratic politics, serving on the Democratic State Committee earlier in his career and hosting fundraisers for Casey and his father, the late former Gov. Robert P. Casey Sr.

Casey said he's known Leeson since shortly after Leeson joined his family's Bethlehem law firm, Leeson, Leeson & Leeson in 1980.

"I think he's the kind of person that we want on the federal court because of his integrity and because of his broad experience as a lawyer," Casey said.

Three other candidates for the Eastern District bench in Pennsylvania appeared before the committee. They are former state Attorney General Jerry Pappert, Montgomery County attorney Mark Kearney and Philadelphia attorney Wendy Beetlestone.

Pappert, Kearney or Beetlestone would be based in Philadelphia if one of their nominations is approved.

The Senate committee did not vote on the appointments Thursday, instead asking the nominees to answer some questions in writing. With Congress leaving for its August recess after next week, the nominations likely will not move on to a full Senate vote until at least September.

Toomey said approving those nominations and getting another judge in place in downtown Allentown is important to ensuring the region's residents have easy access to the federal judicial system.

Although Smith is temporarily stationed in Allentown, the city historically has not had more than one federal district judge.

"As the third-largest city in Pennsylvania and as the heart of the third-largest region — the Lehigh Valley of Pennsylvania — we need to have a second federal judge in the Allentown courthouse," Toomey said.

lolson@mcall.com

Twitter @LauraOlson

202-824-8216

Reporter Peter Hall contributed to this story.