The state’s leading health insurance provider has opted to stop offering stand-alone prescription drug coverage available to seniors through Medicare.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana announced in a letter to its members that it will discontinue its Medicare Part D coverage in 2014. The letter directed those who have it to shop for another drug plan elsewhere.

“Because your plan will no longer be offered, you can join a new plan anytime between October 15, 2013 and February 28, 2014,” according to the letter, which is posted on the company’s website. “However, if you don’t join a new Medicare drug plan by December 31, you won’t have drug coverage starting January 1, 2014.”

About 13,000 seniors were covered through the company’s BlueRx prescription plans, which have been offered since 2006. That’s out of 333,0000 Louisianians who currently receive Part D prescription coverage, according to the state Department of Insurance.

Part D is private insurance option made available to Medicare recipients who want to add additional drug coverage to their government-subsidized health care plans. People who enroll in a Medicare prescription drug plan receive additional financial help paying for the premiums, deductibles, gaps in coverage and co-pays not covered through Medicare alone.

In a written statement, officials with Blue Cross Blue Shield they decided not to renew their contract with the federal Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services after considerable thought.

“To allocate resources most effectively, the company made the strategic business decision to discontinue offering RxBLUE beginning in 2014,” the statement read. “This is not related to the Affordable Care Act. The ACA does not affect Medicare. Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana independently made the strategic business decision to discontinue offering RxBLUE, but there are other plans in Louisiana that offer Medicare Part D coverage and are contracted with CMS to do so.”

The decision does not affect their BlueChoice65 supplemental plans, which are available to Medicare-eligible people to help cover other costs not covered by the federal health insurance.

Medicare’s website indicates that in 2013 Blue Cross Blue Shield offered two Part D prescription drug plans. Called RxBlue, one of the plans had a monthly premium of $51.20 and a $320 deductible. The second with a $118 monthly premium and no deductible. Only the higher premium plan offered prescription coverage in what is often called the “donut hole” or “gap” of Medicare prescription coverage.

In 2014, that gap starts after patients accumulate $2,850 in prescription costs and ends after they hit $4,550. Whereas in the past, Medicare enrollees were required to pay the full out-of-pocket costs for drugs purchased during that “doughnut hole” of coverage, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act gives Part D enrollees a 52.5 percent discount on their brand name drugs and a 28 percent discount on generics.

The law is designed to eliminate the gap in prescription coverage by 2020.

According to the Louisiana Department of Insurance, there remain 28 stand-alone drug plan options for any of the state’s 750,000 Medicare beneficiaries who qualify based on their circumstances. Only five of those plans offer any additional prescription coverage in the gap.

Medicare’s website, however, lists 26 plans, five of which include gap coverage.

Despite the news that Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana has withdrawn its offerings, the average number of stand-alone prescription drug plans that Medicare beneficiaries have to choose from nationally is actually expected to rise from 31 to 34 in 2014, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Kaiser also reports that, nationally, the average monthly prescription drug plan premiums will increase by about $1.76, or 5 percent, in 2014 to $39.90. Premiums have risen every year since 2006, not counting a slight drop between 2011 and 2012, according to the organization.

Anyone with questions about their coverage or who needs help finding a new plan can contact the Louisiana Department of Insurance Senior Health Insurance Information Program at 1-800-259-5300 or Medicare at 1-800-633-4227. Information is also available online at www.bcbsla.com/RxBlue.