Bernie Sanders’ plan to deliver “Medicare for all” may be a good deal for many Americans, but it might be bad for working seniors already enrolled in the government health plan.

The Democratic presidential candidate has said his universal health-care plan would result in a tax increase, including for middle and lower-income Americans. But, he argues, that would be more than offset by savings from ending high-cost private health insurance plans.

Yet, under his plan, the nation’s 8.5 million seniors over the age of 65 and already eligible for Medicare would also get hit with tax increases. With more of the nation’s baby boom generation working into traditional retirement years, the concern is that the costs to seniors are higher than Sanders' plan suggests.

“Under Bernie’s plan, everybody may well benefit, but there’s going to be a substantial number of seniors who are going to feel like they’re worse off,” said John Rother, president of the National Coalition on Health Care, a nonpartisan coalition aiming to lower health costs. “These tradeoffs are inevitable in any kind of big picture health care plan.”

It’s the latest critique to emerge since Sanders released the details of his plan hours before the last Democratic debate in Charleston. Most of the criticism has been that Sanders is promising a massive increase in benefits coverage for all Americans – including for dental, mental health, vision and hearing – while assuming considerable savings that are only vaguely detailed.

The concern over the potential impact on working seniors is just one example of problems that arise as details of the plan emerge, critics say.

Warren Gunnels, Sanders chief policy adviser, said even working seniors subject to additional taxes stand to save. A senior working past the age of 65 making $50,000 per year would pay less than $840 for their health care, he said. A 2014 Kaiser Family Foundation report found the average senior pays $4,734 out of pocket for health care costs, meaning they would save more than $3,800 under Sanders' plan.

Additionally, most seniors working past the age of 65 have additional health insurance from their employers that include premiums, deductibles and co-payments. “Every senior citizen in this country with less than $250,000 in income would save thousands of dollars a year,” said Gunnels. “Anyone who claims otherwise is simply not telling the truth,” he said.

Still, Austan Goolsbee, the former chair of President Obama’s economic council, said the Sanders campaign is being “a little sneaky” about the final tab for taxpayers, including working seniors.

Sanders’ plan includes an additional 2.2% income tax for most Americans and a 6.2% payroll tax for all employers, in addition to an estate tax and higher federal rates on the wealthiest Americans.

“The Sanders people are just using a sleight of hand,” said Goolsbee, who is supporting Clinton but is not working on her campaign. “They’re only counting the income tax part of the tax increase,” and not the employer tax, he said. “Employers are going to make the employees pay that. If they didn’t, a whole lot of these people would be laid off.”

According to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, employer tax rate increases are generally passed on to employees in the form of lower wages or higher prices.

As the race for the Democratic nomination tightens in the early voting states of Iowa and New Hampshire, Clinton and Sanders are dueling over competing visions for expanding health-care coverage. Clinton says Sanders would undo a decade’s worth of Democratic work to expand benefits via Obamacare by pushing a plan that is unworkable and would never pass Congress.

She advocates building on Obamacare and pressuring drug companies to lower costs. Sanders says Obamacare isn’t good enough, and that presidents including Franklin Roosevelt have supported a single-payer system that would dramatically lower costs by cutting out insurance companies and forcing pharmaceutical companies to negotiate prices with the government.

The Sanders campaign calculates a savings, said Gunnels, for seniors earning $50,000 a year even including the employer tax. "FDR had a word for this line of attack," said Gunnels. "FDR called it 'deceit.'"

Sanders released details of his plan following pressure from Clinton and her allies. One independent analysis, by Gerald Friedman, an economist at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, found Sanders proposal would reduce health care spending in the U.S. by $6 trillion over the next 10 years. Sanders says the typical family earning $50,000 a year would save nearly $6,000 annually in health care costs.

Yet others, including Goolsbee, say the idea assumes that most people will value the health-care benefits they will receive over the tax increases they’ll experience. Goolsbee, who helped craft Obama’s Affordable Care Act and wants to see it continued, estimates the Sanders plan would raise the government share of the economy by $20 trillion over ten years.

“He’s talking about government spending as a share of GDP (gross domestic product) rising dramatically to the levels they are in France, Sweden, Denmark, the big social democracies in Europe, which we’ve never had,” said Goolsbee.

The potential downside for working seniors is among the specifics that need to be carefully considered when completely overhauling the current health-care system, said Rother.

“I have no stake in this race,” he said. “Medicare for all has been the slogan of a lot of people over the years, but it really is just a slogan. It doesn’t really tell you much about how the program would work.’’