Buy Photo David Young (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Good news! The 2014 campaign is finally over for the Republican majority in Congress.

At least, that's what Congressman David Young indicated when I caught up to him during last week's district work period. The freshman Republican said he thinks the GOP majority is finally turning the corner from campaign mode to conducting the nation's business.

"I think we're getting around to realizing some of the messaging is over," Young said. "You know, we got in there, and there were a lot of messaging bills: the repeal of health care, Keystone, some tax issues. And it's time to govern, which I heartily believe is why I was elected."

“We want that message to turn into actual pieces of legislation which will move our country in the right direction,” Sen. Joni Ernst said in an interview Friday. (Photo: Getty Images)

Sen. Joni Ernst, a Republican from Red Oak, agreed. "I think David has a very valid point. We do like to have our message get across, but we also have to understand that at some point, we want that message to turn into actual pieces of legislation which will move our country in the right direction," she said in an interview Friday.

Young, of Van Meter, said he thinks his party won the Senate and increased its majority in the House in November 2014 because "people are tired of gridlock and lack of governance, and so they were going to give Republicans a shot."

But, he said, "If we don't follow through, then they can always vote us out."

You may have noticed it's already five months into 2015 and the 2016 campaign has already begun. So when will this mythical "governing" start to occur?

It's already begun, Young said. The Medicare "doc fix" passed last month with broad, bipartisan support. The bill prevented a Medicare reimbursement cut of more than 20 percent to physicians and also included a two-year renewal of the federal Children's Health Insurance Program, CHIP. It passed quickly as a result of collaboration by Speaker John Boehner and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, without another fight over repealing the Affordable Care Act.

"That was a big deal," Young said. "That issue could have been demagogued 10 different ways."

The next big deal is on the line this week. The Senate is scheduled to vote Tuesday on whether to consider fast-track Trade Promotion Authority. The White House wants the bill, which is expected to help land the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement. There are supporters and opponents in both parties, so the bill needs bipartisan collaboration by congressional leaders and President Barack Obama.

"I think the president's going to probably need Republicans' help on getting these trade issues through," Young said. "That's a nice way that we can work together."

Ernst said Friday on "Iowa Press" that she supports the Trade Promotion Authority because it is important to Iowa businesses. "Here in Iowa, about one in five jobs is dependent upon trade, which is a significant part of our economy here in Iowa," she said. "So I do support this. I've heard from a number of Iowa businesses; even our small businesses are quite active in trade overseas."

Amid other difficult issues such as the extension of the Patriot Act, the clock is ticking toward another budget deadline this fall. House and Senate Republicans have agreed on a spending framework, but Obama has threatened vetoes. Without an approved budget, Congress would be back to its old habits of passing short-term continuing resolutions to avoid a government shutdown.

Young, who serves on the House Appropriations Committee, said the first goal is to again get the budget process back to regular order with bills going through the committee. "And we want to get to the point where we can prove to the American people and to our caucus that we can govern," he said.

Is that really possible, though, with three Republican senators already in the presidential race and a fourth poised to announce? Sens. Ted Cruz, Rand Paul and Marco Rubio are official candidates for the 2016 presidential race and Sen. Lindsey Graham is expected to join the pack. Meanwhile, Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont has announced a campaign for the Democratic nomination. Seems like there will be plenty of opportunity for "messaging" in the coming months.

Ernst says that's not going to derail the Senate's resolve to govern. "We are in a governing mode," she said.

"If those candidates want to step out on their own and try and push a certain message, that's their prerogative," she said. "But we are very intent on focusing and making sure the budget, making sure our appropriations bills are moving through."

Let's hope that's not just wishful thinking. With the 2016 campaign already underway, the resolve to govern may not last long.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1bLBCf7