Kasich proposing that some Medicaid recipients pay monthly premiums

A progressive advocacy group is criticizing the Kasich administration for proposing premiums of about $20 a month for some Medicaid users, saying such fees are a barrier that likely will cause some recipients to lose health care.

Studies have shown fees, even seemingly modest ones, can affect whether poor people obtain health care, said Wendy Patton, senior projects director for Policy Matters Ohio.

“Requiring premiums for access to health care works against public health and a more efficient, effective health-care system. It’s a lose-lose strategy,” Patton said. “The goal of policymakers should be to reduce barriers to care and encourage participation, allowing individuals to lead healthier, more productive, financially stable lives.”

The proposed monthly premiums would be in addition to modest co-pays Medicaid recipients are required to pay. Kasich pushed to expand Ohio’s Medicaid coverage to cover additional people, including single, childless adults, and the governor is asking the Ohio General Assembly to keep that expansion going. Medicaid provides health insurance coverage to low-income people who can’t afford to buy private health insurance, even with the subsidies offered by the Affordable Care Act.

A spokesman for the state’s Medicaid program, Sam Rossi, said the proposal only applies to a small portion of the state’s Medicaid recipients and is designed to help higher-income recipients learn how to transition to private health insurance. The vast majority of Ohio’s Medicaid clients would not be asked to pay the premiums, he said.

The Medicaid premium proposal is part of the budget proposal Kasich submitted a few weeks ago. It asks state lawmakers to approve Medicaid premiums for adults who are over 100 percent of the state poverty level. If the Ohio General Assembly adopted the proposal, it would save Ohio

$1.6 million in 2016 and

$3.2 million in 2017.

Patton said while research shows charging reasonable fees doesn’t create a barrier to health care for middle class or rich people, fees can deny service to poor people struggling to pay for the necessities of life.

It can lead to a situation where a person deciding whether to buy diapers or go in for a checkup might say, “I’m feeling pretty good, I don’t need a checkup,” she said.

Much of the point of health care reform is to encourage preventive care, so people don’t put off problems until they have a heart attack or another medical emergency and wind up in the emergency room, Patton said.

The governor’s budget proposal states that in 2014, Medicaid provided health care coverage for 2.8 million Ohioans.

That figure is now up to 2.9 million, and Kasich’s proposal would affect only 100,000 people, those living above the poverty line, Rossi said.

The proposal is not intended to raise revenue, but to introduce people who likely will transition out of Medicaid to the idea of paying health insurance premiums, Rossi said. The premiums are comparable to what they would pay to buy private health insurance in the Affordable Care Act health exchanges once subsidies are taken into consideration, he said.

The proposal also does not affect seniors or disabled people on Medicaid, Rossi said.

Policy Matters Ohio and Kasich are on the same page on whether Medicaid expansion should continue. Lawmakers have until the end of June to write the next two-year state budget.

The expansion added about 490,000 Ohioans to Medicaid coverage, according to testimony that Kasich’s Medicaid director, John McCarthy, gave to the House Finance Subcommittee on Health and Human Services on Feb. 26. About 52 percent of the newly-covered people are men, and 48 percent women.

Patton said the House will put together its budget proposal sometime in April and pass it along to the Senate.

Hospitals in Ohio support the continued expansion of Medicaid eligibility, Patton said.

“We’re very hopeful that the lawmakers look out across Ohio’s health systems and understand what we’re hearing from the hospitals,” she said.

Rossi, asked how Medicaid expansion is faring, responded, ““We are actively meeting with and working with our counterparts in the legislation on the budget proposal as a whole, and we are looking forward to continuing to do so over the next several months.”