Related Safe after Nepal quake, Allen High grad prepares for the trip home

After a gut-wrenching week of waiting, Sharon Banks was finally able to hold her daughter again Saturday.

Danielle Banks had spent the last several days at the U.S. Embassy in Kathmandu, Nepal, after an earthquake on April 25 killed thousands in the South Asian country.

The magnitude 7.8 temblor also triggered an avalanche on Mount Everest, killing at least 19 people around a base camp. The 22-year-old Allen High School graduate and a friend suffering from altitude sickness had begun walking down from the camp about 30 minutes earlier and were in a village below when the avalanche hit the area.

Nearly eight days later, Danielle landed safely at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.

Seconds after walking through the sliding doors for international arrivals Saturday afternoon, she was embraced by her relieved mother, sister, nephew and boyfriend.

Sharon Banks, who had not seen her daughter since March, spent an emotional and draining two days after the earthquake wondering if her daughter was alive.

“It was an indescribable feeling because you have so many emotions at one time,” she said.

“Not knowing if she was dead or alive, if she was still on the mountain. Where is she? Am I going to plan a funeral? Am I going to have a body to plan a funeral?” she said. “So many things go through your head when you don’t know.”

Sharon Banks said that as she and her daughter exchanged messages in the days immediately after the quake, Danielle didn’t tell her a lot about of what had happened — including that she had been actually in the avalanche.

“It was an experience,” Danielle Banks said. “It was kind of like a state of shock.”

When the earthquake hit, Danielle said, she and others didn’t realize at first what was happening. Once they did, they ran for open space.

Seconds later, the village where they were located, Gorak Shep, was hit. The town avoided the brunt of the onslaught, and the two hikers weren’t injured.

“I felt very thankful to be where I was at the time,” Danielle said. “I know other mountains … were covered in rock slides, and avalanches and land slides.”

Aftershocks followed, and Danielle and her friend, named Olivia, knew they would have to keep making their way down the mountain.

“When you’re in a high stress situation like that, your survival skills kick in,” she said.

Sharon Banks arranged for the two to be airlifted from the village of Namche Bazaar to the embassy.

“They say you can’t move mountains, but I moved Mount Everest and got her off that mountain,” Sharon Banks said.

At the airport, she tried to calm her nerves and occasionally teared up thinking about her daughter. Danielle’s boyfriend and nephew held flowers.

“It’s good to have her home,” said Michelle Mackey, Danielle’s sister. “As soon as I knew she was OK, I’ve been fine, but it was the initial not knowing that was scary. I’m definitely glad she’s back.”

Danielle graduated from Texas A&M University in December and had gone to Nepal to work with a group combating human trafficking. She had taken an extra 10 days to hike.

During their exchange of messages after the earthquake, Danielle asked if she should stay to help with relief efforts. Her mother sternly said no, and Danielle said Saturday that she knew leaving was the right thing to do.

“Just being there and taking up those resources that Nepal needs wasn’t something that I wanted to do,” she said.

She said she hopes that attention doesn’t shift from Nepal in the coming months, and she hopes to return in March to help with the relief effort.

Sharon Banks isn’t thrilled about the idea of Danielle going back to Nepal, but she remains proud and supportive.

“That’s her passion. That’s her major is helping women and children in need,” she said. “That’s what she wants to do with her life.”