Sen. Joe Manchin Joe ManchinGroups urge Senate to oppose defense language on for-profit colleges How Congress got to yes on toxic chemical reform Red-state Dem hits back over coal, court attacks MORE (D-W.Va.) on Sunday announced that he will not run for governor in his home state.

ADVERTISEMENT

“My main purpose in the Senate, has, and always will be, to represent the great people of West Virginia to the best of my ability, and I have always said that when my country succeeds, my state succeeds,” Manchin told host Bob Schieffer on CBS’s “Face the Nation.”

“I feel that I can have the greatest impact on West Virginia and America by staying in Washington,” he continued. “This place may not be working now, but I’m not going to stop fighting to make it work.”

Manchin cited his belief that bipartisan cooperation was improving in Congress as a key reason he was staying on Capitol Hill.

“I will admit it has been a harder transition than I had expected, but I believe that, after five years, we are beginning to make a difference,” Manchin said of his efforts reaching across the aisle.

“We are simply bringing a greater sense of bipartisanship and commitment to working together for the good of the American people,” he continued.

“It is because of that optimism that I have decided to continue serving the people of West Virginia in the United States Senate,” he concluded.

Manchin had previously vowed to make a decision no later than Memorial Day.

The rise of Sen. Chuck Schumer (N.Y.) to the top Democratic Senate leadership spot may have swayed Manchin’s decision.

Manchin is believed to have a much warmer relationship with Schumer than Sen. Harry Reid (Nev.), who is retiring after his current term.

Schumer will replace Reid as Senate minority leader after Reid departs the 114th Congress.

Manchin additionally endorsed 2016 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton during his CBS appearance Sunday. The West Virginia lawmaker praised her work in all walks of politics as the reason behind his decision.

“I personally believe Hillary Clinton is the best person to do this job for America,” he said. “She has more experience than any other person we can get at that level.”

--This report was updated at 12:31 a.m.