The state health exchange board approved a $66 million budget and a $13 million funding stream Monday to run the nonprofit as the federal grant money runs out.

Connect for Health Colorado board members, in a nearly unanimous vote, approved the 2015 fiscal year budget and $1.25 monthly assessment on all small group, individual and stop loss (policies by self-insured entities to cover catastrophic losses) health insurance policies in the state.

Board member Ellen Daehnick, who called in to the meeting, was the only board member to vote against the budget and assessment. Daehnick said she supports the Affordable Care Act but is concerned that exchange staff can’t provide her with basic facts and analysis.

“Feelings are no way to allocate funds; we need analysis,” she said when reached by phone after the meeting. “The budget as presented to the board for evaluation doesn’t have the analysis on the executive level based in fact and doesn’t have good forecasting going forward. As a board member, I can’t allocate public dollars based on that.”

Dr. Mike Fallon, a board member who initially opposed the fee but in the end voted for it, said he wanted to put exchange staff on notice that he would be watching the budget closely. He decided to vote for the fee because it’s a third of what insurers paid to Cover Colorado — a last-resort insurance pool that the state closed after the Affordable Care Act passed. The legislation allows the exchange to charge up to $1.80 for the assessment.

“I wanted to let them know the decision didn’t come easy and with no strings attached,” he said after the meeting.

But other board members feared the exchange would not have enough money to continue operations.

Marguerite Salazar, the state insurance commissioner who is a nonvoting member of the board, said states like Oregon have moved to the problem-plagued federal exchange. She doesn’t want that to happen in Colorado, which could be a result of insufficient funding.

“Now is not the time to go lean,” Salazar said. “It’s more difficult to increase than decrease” the fee later.

The fee, which sunsets after 2016, will raise about $13 million a year. The exchange also collects 1.4 percent of the premiums sold in the exchange.

The exchange staff is analyzing the impact of people dropping policies and extension of noncompliant policies for another year on their budget.

The approved 2015 budget cuts customer service from $22.5 million to $13.6 million, marketing by more than half to $4.8 million, and technology by about 24 percent to $29.5 million. The remaining $15 million will pay for operations, general administration (like salaries) and money to assist people in buying insurance. There is also $3 million to potentially buy a building in Colorado Springs.

The cut in customer service will result in the call center answering 80 percent of calls in 90 seconds instead of 80 percent in 20 seconds, which was the case before open enrollment ended.

Exchange executive director Patty Fontneau said the staff heard “loud and clear” that the board wanted to keep expenses as low as possible and that the longer call center times are acceptable.

Marc Reese, associate director for the Colorado Association of Health Plans, said there hasn’t been a formal vote on the assessment but believes most of his members would support the fee. “Lower is better,” he said. “But the exchange needs (money) to do its job.”