Topics: 1 percent, Anthony Kennedy, aol_on, Citizens United, Editor's Picks, frank vandersloot, Inequality, Mitt Romney, Mother Jones, Plutocracy, Media News, News, Politics News

The Supreme Court’s Citizens United ruling is a consummately extreme and ideological document, the product of the Federalist Society mindset through and through. So if you’re trying to elevate one specific part of the ruling as especially disconnected, you’ve got a lot to work with. In fact, it’s one of those questions for which there is no “wrong” answer.

If I had to choose just a single piece of the decision’s underlying argument as the most unhinged, though, I’d go with Justice Anthony Kennedy’s assertion that “independent expenditures do not lead to, or create the appearance of, quid pro quo corruption.” I’ve written about this previously, so I’ll try not to belabor the point. But the key thing here is that Kennedy isn’t just saying super PACs don’t corrupt. He’s saying they don’t even create the appearance of corruption.

Because guarding against even the mere appearance of corruption is seen as a legitimate and Constitutional government interest, Kennedy, if he wanted to make Citizens United stick, didn’t have much of a choice but to argue as he did. Yet even if you give Kennedy “credit,” in a sense, and assume his argument stemmed from Machiavellian cynicism rather than libertarian dogmatism, the idea is still self-evidently absurd. (And subsequent polling has confirmed it to be empirically wrong, as well.)

Again, Kennedy’s is an especially radical view. That said, the general assumption that allows Kennedy to stray so far off the reservation — that economic inequality does not create political inequality — is widely accepted by conservative elites. A cursory knowledge of history and simple common sense should make you reject the idea out-of-hand. But if you need a real-world example of why economic and political power aren’t so easily decoupled, look no further than a district court ruling that came out of Idaho earlier this week.

The case in question involved the liberal magazine Mother Jones and Frank VanderSloot, a GOP mega-donor (who, judging by his name, may also be a villain in a long-lost Charles Dickens story). You can read MoJo’s recap of the case here, but the quick-and-dirty summary goes like this: In 2012, VanderSloot sued MoJo for defamation over a piece about his company’s support for a pro-Romney super PAC that also happened to mention his history opposing gay rights. MoJo fought back. VanderSloot lost.