Schools must preserve the art of cursive writing

Why learn cursive?

For openers, it is the first and best form of personalized communication. It gives personality to your letter. It is a form of expression. You may not always have the ability to “text,” or have a computer available. And, believe it or not, not everyone has an electronic phone or tablet or computer. They are dependent on the skill of simplistic writing, cursive writing.

Additionally, through your travels in life, you are required to fill out countless preprinted forms where you must reflect the answers to the questions on these forms. Your electronic device will do you no good in these situations.

Cursive writing also continues the practice of learning a language. Texting as such, opens the door to a different, abbreviated form of communicating. Acronyms abound. With the advent of the hand-held calculator, did learning basic math become a thing of the past? Addition, subtraction, multiplication and division are still a stable of the learning process in our (elementary) schools and so should be learning the art of cursive writing.

Lastly, how can you express your thoughts on a birthday, Christmas or sympathy card to your family member or close friend if you don’t know how to write cursive? If you do not know the skills of cursive writing, how would you sign your name? Cursive writing is a tried and proven art form that must be preserved, developed and practiced throughout life, unless you are a doctor, then you must learn to print legibly.

— Gail Edwards, San Bernardino

Too many problems remain with Obamacare

I really have been listening to both sides of the ACA/Obamacare debate. It does have some very minor good points, such as making health insurance available to all at a price that is affordable and covering pre-existing conditions, and keeping your younger children on your polices until they are 26 (why just 26)? After that, its failures take over.

Prices are not coming down and lies abound about what you can keep or can’t keep. Employers are being told they have to supply particular items to employees rather than just letting the people be charged by the insurance company for the items they might want that are extra. Putting together a program that makes prices lower by mandating enrollment to reduce prices is wrong, as is making various product levels of unreasonable conditions and coverage restrictions.

The American taxpayers are paying for every aspect of the bill, i.e., the subsidies being paid by the feds, which in turn we are responsible for. You can’t give health care away without paying for it.

Now we have not only the lies and misdirection tactics by the administration, we have them minimizing the problems and the fixes for the whole program.

Mr. President and members of Congress, you still have another major hurdle — the nonexistent federal budget — and you want to tackle immigration reform, too? So, basically, your plate is full and you really don’t know how to admit you are in the hole and it is only getting deeper.

Advertisement

You, Mr. President need to sit at your desk and get to work, put your pride in your hip pocket and work for the American people instead of your party fundraising trips to California!

— David Irvine, Upland

Stop the stampedes on Black Friday

Re: “Rialto Walmart Thanksgiving brawl sends one police officer to hospital,” Nov. 29.

Hand a voucher to everyone standing in line outside the store for as many sale items as you have available. Only those with vouchers get one. That will end the stampedes and fighting.

— Kelley Bradley via Facebook