The American public was subjected to more stories in one day about New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s “situation” than on the IRS-targeting-conservatives scandal over a 15-day span. One is left to wonder why there were no similar stories concerning Benghazi and the apparent invisibility of the U.S. president. This is the same president who has been Teflon-coated by a mainstream media focusing on the Christie controversy to take Obama off the front page and aid and abet his escape from the heated critique he is receiving from former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates.

Like flies to honey, the liberal media is rushing to destroy Christie, whose “I didn’t know any of this was happening” defense is identical to the standard excuses of media-darling Obama when he comments on his own administration’s scandals. Most likely, Obama is taking notes so he can use some of Christie’s defenses, which sound truer than Obama’s hollow excuses.

And now the White House is thumping the table, clamoring for Christie to fire more people on his staff. There’s no mention, of course, of Obama’s failure to fire anyone for the catastrophic bunglings and disgraces of his own regime. Think NSA, IRS scandal, Kathleen Sebelious, the Obamacare rollout, Fast & Furious, Afghanistan, Obama’s struggling economy, Benghazi and the budget sequestration of 2013. The only people Obama likes to fire are experienced military officers who disagree with him. Add the other 19 Democrat scandals that were under-reported.

Whatever happens with the lane closure on the New Jersey bridge, it cannot be compared to the wholesale callousness of the Internal Revenue Service toward conservatives who were merely trying to make their voices heard in elections. And lane closures are also a distant second fiddle to Obama putting American armed forces in harm’s way to achieve his political ambitions in Afghanistan and Iraq. That’s one of the points Gates made in his new book, and it’s why the liberal media is focusing on Christie so they can whisk Gates’ portrayals to the back pages.

Because Christie is a Republican and likely opponent of Hillary Clinton in the next presidential election, the mainstream media will develop multiple ways to roast him. If Christie was a Democrat, Obama and the liberal media would be heaping praise on him, rejoicing in how tough he is against political opponents, how forthright he is and how quickly he took action.

It’s hard to disagree with Rush Limbaugh’s conclusion on the Christie controversy that Obama has promoted a culture that shows an “utter disregard” for truth. Our government has cultivated a Beltway Political Class that targets people who make this country work. It ignores laws it doesn’t like, fines businesses billions of dollars to fund its political agenda, creates new laws by executive order that bypass Congress and the U.S. Constitution, and feeds a ravenous beast of a government to grow tentacles that are far too powerful and widespread.

But what may be worse is a press corps that likes to preach about how “balanced” its reporters are and how “objective and factual” its editorialists are. Too many in the mainstream media aid and abet the elitists of the liberal political class. Such elitists freely lie to the American public, and they forget that their job is to serve the people, not be their nanny-state masters. We deserve better from our federal officials and most of the media that covers them.