‘Happy Together Tour’ Kicks Off June 17 At King Center

By Space Coast Daily // June 15, 2015

BREVARD COUNTY • MELBOURNE, FLORIDA – On Wednesday, June 17, the Happy Together Tour takes the stage at the King Center.

This summer, music fans will celebrate as the renowned Happy Together tour is back in Melbourne, and is bigger and better than ever.

This year the tour will offer six premier acts, with a total of 56 Billboard hits amongst them.

The acclaimed yearly summer tour that is going into our 6th consecutive year delivers hit after solid gold hit, artist after solid gold artist, alongside a top-notch multi-media production celebrating that unique time in culture and music.

The unprecedented lineup includes The Turtles Featuring Flo & Eddie, The Association, Mark Lindsay formerly of Paul Revere and the Raiders, The Grass Roots, The Buckinghams and The Cowsills.

The Turtles featuring Flo & Eddie are the headliners of Happy Together and started the tour thirty-one years ago. Led by vocalists Howard Kaylan and Mark Volman, known as Flo & Eddie, The Turtles have sold over 40

million records worldwide. Their hits include: “Happy Together” “She’d Rather Be With Me,” “Elenore” “It Ain’t Me Babe” and “You Showed Me.”

California rock act The Association is best known for the hits “Along Comes Mary,” “Cherish,” “Windy” and “Never My Love.” One of the biggest acts of the 1960s, the group was also the leadoff band at 1967’s legendary Monterey Pop Festival. The Association also performed on the first Happy Together tour in 1984.

Mark Lindsay former lead singer of Paul Revere and the Raiders made his mark with “Kicks,’” “Hungry,” “I’m Not Your Stepping Stone,” “Steppin’ Out,” “Good Thing” “Indian Reservation,” “ Arizona” and others. Mark Lindsay was the co-founder and lead singer of this seminal act from its inception in 1963 through 1975. His voice is heard on all of the Raiders’ 16

Top 20 hits.

The Grass Roots dominated the radio during their heyday of 1967-1972 with their hits “Let’s Live For Today,” “Midnight Confessions,” “Temptation Eyes” and “Sooner or Later” and others. They achieved two gold albums, one gold single and charted singles a total of 21 times. Many an American soldier in Southeast Asia wrote letters home as “Let’s Live For Today” played in the background. Their tribute to our troops, old and young, is inspired and inspiring.

The Buckinghams formed in 1966, and went on to become one of the top selling acts of 1967, including their #1 hit “Kind of a Drag,” and other hits “Don’t You Care,” ”Mercy, Mercy, Mercy” and “Hey Baby, They’re Playing Our Song” With 3 chart hits at one time on 2 labels, in 1967, Billboard Magazine named them “The Most Listened to Band in America.” Carl Giammarese and Nick Fortuna also performed on Happy Together in 1985 and 2012.

The Cowsills is a family singing group and the original inspiration for television’s The Partridge Family. Best known for songs, “The Rain, The Park and Other Things,” “Hair,” “Indian Lake” and “Love American Style.”

The Cowsills appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show and The Tonight Show and with Johnny Carson. We are thrilled to welcome them to the Happy Together Family.

The Happy Together tour began in 1984, with The Turtles featuring Flo & Eddie, Gary Puckett & The Union Gap, Spanky & Our Gang and The Association. The overwhelming response and love for the music has endured and the Happy Together Tour proudly continues the legacy it started 31 year ago.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free