The U.S. Capitol building. Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg News

The highway bill Congress is likely to adopt later this week will be costly for the nation’s biggest banks.

The banks had been lobbying for months to persuade lawmakers not to tap into their revenue streams to pay for transportation infrastructure. On Tuesday, it became clear that they lost that battle. A compromise bill includes a hefty reduction in the dividend payments banks receive from the Federal Reserve.

Just how costly was that defeat? That can be estimated based on what the dividend payments are likely to be under the new system lawmakers laid out.

Each year, the banks receive a dividend payment of about 6% on the stock they’ve purchased in the Federal Reserve. The 1913 Federal Reserve Act requires banks to buy the stock, as a way of funding the central bank and giving it a buffer against potential losses. As an enticement for banks to buy the stock, and as fair compensation for the purchases, the law gave the banks a dividend.

Under the highway bill, those dividends will no longer be fixed at 6%. Banks with greater than $10 billion in assets would have their dividend payments set at 6% or at the yield of the 10–year U.S. Treasury note during the most recent auction prior to the payment of the dividend, whichever is smaller. That yield is expected to average about 3% during calendar year 2016, according to projections from the Congressional Budget Office.

If the actual dividend rate was 3% for 2016, that would mean the banks’ annual dividends would be cut roughly in half. The CBO projects that Treasury yields will rise in later years, but only to an average of 4.3% between 2020 and 2025.

For the four largest U.S. banks combined, halving the dividend payment would cut annual revenue by about $484.5 million during 2016, according to estimates by The Wall Street Journal based on public regulatory filings. That includes estimates of $157 million for Bank of America Corp., $126 million for Citigroup, Inc., $103 million for J.P. Morgan Chase and Co., and $98 million for Wells Fargo & Co.

To be sure, the CBO projections could be wrong. And the impact on the banks could be small, given that they regularly earn annual profits far in excess of the revenue losses at issue here. Bank of America reported a $4.5 billion profit in the third quarter alone.

Still, any reduction in revenue will not be welcome at big banks, which have argued that it is unfair to single them out to pay for highway construction.

“Banks shouldn’t be used like an E-ZPass to pay for highways,” Rob Nichols, president of the American Bankers Association, said in a statement Tuesday. “Dramatically reducing the dividend rate — without hearings, consultation with committees of jurisdiction, study or analysis of any kind whatsoever — is extremely bad public policy.”

The backers of the bill released a statement touting Tuesday’s compromise as a “vital investment in our country.”

Congress also decided to leave alone the dividend payments received by banks with less than $10 billion in assets, thanks to a change designed to please community bankers, who have significant lobbying pull on Capitol Hill. That’s likely to make this outcome sting even more for the very biggest firms, which have already been the focus of intense regulatory scrutiny since they took bailouts during the financial crisis.