PAMELA A. MOORE/ISTOCK

GURPREET DHALIWAL: Patients want second opinions to be useful. Doctors do, too.

The second opinion consultation is an opportunity to provide reassurance or a clear path forward (when opinions agree–as they do about 80% of the time) or to provide options (when opinions disagree). Like most doctors, I both request and provide second opinions, and based on that experience, offer the following tips to get the most out of the process:

Collect and bring medical records yourself. A busy clinic or health system can’t always get the right records to the right person at the right time. It’s an awful hassle to collect all the records, but it’s also a major setback when those records are not available for review at the first meeting. One benefit of these efforts is that the patient emerges more informed about their condition.

Find somebody from a different team. It’s tricky for doctors to disagree with a colleague. And frequently institutional culture (“that’s the way we do it around here”) influences our decision making as much as science does. Seek your second opinion in another health-care system or online.

In-person preferred. Online-opinion services are particularly effective for cases that hinge on a single image (photo, X-ray, or slide) or test, but when the data set is extensive, it’s harder to reach a personalized decision online. In a complex case, the doctor needs to understand you as a person through conversation, facial expressions and back-and-forth questions. The doctor should hope to earn your trust in the same way. For the first visit, a lot is missed by not meeting in person.

Know your key question. Do you wonder most about the diagnosis, the treatment options or the prognosis? The doctor is going to analyze all three, but knowing where your greatest uncertainty lies helps us know where to spend the most time thinking—and explaining.

Sometimes patients and doctors approach the second opinion with the hope of getting the “right answer,” but there is rarely such a thing in complex cases. The objective of the second opinion is to provide a new perspective and more information for better decision making. Sometimes the second opinion visit doesn’t end with an opinion at all. Instead it becomes a space to understand the first doctor’s thought process or for the patient to clarify his or her own goals and feel comfortable and informed. In my opinion, that’s time well spent.

Dr. Gurpreet Dhaliwal is a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Francisco and a staff physician at the San Francisco VA Medical Center.

Read the latest Health Report.