Topics: Bernie Sanders, Bill Clinton, democrats 2016, Election 2016, Hillary Clinton, Obamacare, Paul Krugman, Stimulus, Tea Party, yves smith, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

As you may have heard by now, New York Times columnist, Nobel Prize-winning economist and Salon mainstay Paul Krugman is earning himself a reputation of sorts as a Bernie Sanders skeptic.

His latest column is the most sustained critique of the Vermont senator’s presidential campaign we’ve seen from him yet, it’s true. But Krugman’s been looking askance at Sanders’ campaign for a while now, and his gripe — that Sanders’ campaign promises are unrealistic on both political and policy grounds — has been consistent throughout.

As you might imagine, though, many left-wing tweeters couldn’t care less about Krugman’s earnestness. They think he’s just another elite wagon-circler. They’re pissed:

Krugman likes his Democrats comfortably establishment https://t.co/R79n65sGg7 — Michael Hoexter (@mike_cal) January 22, 2016

Krugman writes an article on how political change happens where the only numbers cited are dates https://t.co/nUxTsBey1y — Ethan Gatch (@ethangach) January 22, 2016

Krugman: "I must use my massively privilege op-ed space to concede to the status quo once again!" https://t.co/amtth3L8Vp — holly wood (@girlziplocked) January 22, 2016

@NYTimeskrugman Krugman must be promised a position in an HRC administration. Sounding her trumpet pretty loudly these days. — ShitGranGranthamSays (@SGGranthamSays) January 22, 2016

Some Experts, Like Krugman, Supported Single Payer Until Bernie Sanders Put It in His Platform #NakedCapitalism https://t.co/aUQiboHR4c — Jonathan Cohn (@JonathanCohn) January 22, 2016

That last tweet links to this post from Yves Smith at Naked Capitalism. It’s a series of quotes from center-left pundits and politicians, all of whom express their support — in the abstract — for a single-payer model of national health insurance. The most recent quote is from 2011. The oldest is from 2003. Except for a short note at the top, claiming the post is an example of “res ipsa loquitur,” Smith herself provides no commentary or analysis.

As you probably guessed when you saw the list of tweets, I’m going to ask you to allow me to indulge in a bit of a generalization. Namely, that a lot of Krugman’s left-wing critics think he’s somehow changing his tune. They’re wrong, and I’ll explain why in a moment. But first I’ll take a swipe at re-creating their (quite reasonable) thought process.

They remember how critical Krugman was of candidate Obama in the 2008 primary; and they remember that he was the “anti-Obama” during the president’s first few years in office. But they also remember that Krugman ultimately came to write an influential Rolling Stone piece in the president’s defense. They believe that the Democratic Party establishment is in the tank for Hillary Clinton, Sanders’ chief opponent. They figure Krugman, now firmly back in the establishment’s clutches, is following suit.

Again, it’s not a wild or outrageous narrative. It doesn’t require imagining Krugman is part of a coordinated campaign, devised in some dark and shadowy conference room — perhaps the one the Springfield Republican Party uses — with elevating Clinton, and thwarting Sanders, as its goal. But it’s still wrong; and it misremembers (or misrepresents) not only Krugman’s positions in the past and today, but also, by proxy, the position of Sanders-skeptic lefties in general.

But before I attempt to expand this in a way that makes it relevant to people besides Paul Krugman and Angry Person On Twitter, let’s start with Mr. Nobel Prize-winner and why charges of hypocrisy or selling out are mistaken.

To be blunt, there is no contradiction in thinking single-payer is a better model while simultaneously thinking that making it a central part of the 2016 presidential campaign is tilting at windmills. Human beings are capable of wishing the world were a certain way but recognizing it’s another way — and acting accordingly. This is not something that only unprincipled, hack, establishment, D.C. insider, yadda-yadda-yadda villains do. It’s a thing that people do. Bernie “reparations are too divisive” Sanders has done it before. I’d imagine that, before this campaign is over, he’ll do it again.

The second attack — that Krugman started to like Obama only once the latter had become a part of the establishment himself — is nearly as off the mark. It’s true that Krugman has become much more friendly toward Obama over the past eight or so years. I remember well how he was one of the few liberals with the temerity to grumble about parliamentary trench warfare and Republican intransigence when everyone else just wanted to drift in the warm waters of Hope and Change. But the reason Krugman is now one of Obama’s chief defenders isn’t because he changed. It’s because Obama did.