People Moves of the Week: CIT, KeyBanc, Lindsay Goldberg

CIT's John Thain announces retirement plans; KeyBanc expands consumer group; Lindsay Goldberg adds partner

CIT Group Inc.- The middle-market lender announced that CEO John Thain will retire on March 31, 2016. He will be replaced by Ellen Alemany. In addition, CIT (NYSE: CIT) announced that corporate controller Carol Hayes has been promoted to CFO, effective, Nov. 1. Thain is the former CEO of Bank of Merrill Lynch before those two banks merged. He took over CIT in 2010.

Cole Schotz PC- James Stefanick recently joined the law firm’s corporate group in New York. He focuses on middle-market M&A in the media, manufacturing, industrials and consumer sectors. Previously, Stefanick was an M&A counsel for Dechert LLP.

Goodwin Procter- The law firm hired William Growney as a partner in its technology and life sciences group. He is based in the firm’s San Francisco office. Growney was most recently a general counsel for retail data and marketing company RichRelevance.

Greenbriar Equity Group LLC- The Rye, New York, transportation-focused private equity firm hired David Dyckman as an advisory director. In his role, Dyckman will assist in sourcing and researching new potential investments. Dyckman was a former COO and CFO at American Tire Distributors.

KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc. – The middle-market investment bank hired Michael Taylor as a managing director in its consumer investment banking group. He is based in Chicago. Taylor focuses on household and personal care products. Before joining KeyBanc (NYSE: KEY), Taylor was a managing director in BMO Capital Markets’ retail and consumer group.

Lindsay Goldberg- Eric Fry has joined the New York-based middle-market private equity firm as a partner. Before coming over to Lindsay Goldberg, Fry was a managing director in Morgan Stanley’s (NYSE: MS) private equity group.

Meketa Investment Group- The investment advisory firm has opened a new office in Chicago. As a result, Ted Disabato joined the firm as a managing principal. In addition, current Meketa principal Alexandra Wallace, will move from the firm’s Boston office to Chicago. Meketa is a employee-owneed investment consulting firm for institutional investors.

PricewaterhouseCoopers- David Ethridge has joined PwC as a managing director in the firm’s deal practice group. In his new role, Ethridge will work with PwC’s capital markets team in helping clients prepare for IPOs. Ethridge previously led the New York Stock Exchange’s capital markets group.

Sidley Austin LLP- Geoffrey Levin has joined the law firm’s New York office as a partner, focusing on private equity and M&A. He works with clients in the financial services, retail and health care sectors. Levin was previously with Cadwalader Wickersham & Taft LLP

For more information on related topics, visit the following: