One of the most violent acts seen on a football field has left fans venting their disgust on social media.

Wigan's prop forward Ben Flower became the first man to be sent off in a Super League Grand Final after punching St Helens five-eighth Lance Hohaia to the ground, before punching him again while he lay unconscious. St Helens won the match 14-6, but Flower's actions was the talking point.

The image of a defenceless man being punched in the head by another player kneeled over him left referee Phil Bentham with no option but to give Flower his marching orders. Hohaia left the field for treatment and did not return.

Red card offence: Ben Flower of Wigan Warriors punches Lance Hohaia. Photo: Screengrab

With the game just 123 seconds old, viewers instantly took to social media to slam the Wales international for his brain snap and violent conduct.

Advertisement

Respected British boxing commentator Steve Bunce went so far to say Flower should be locked up for his actions.

I'm assuming that Ben Flower likes prison food - he has to be nicked for that assault. That's a UFC inspired second punch, savage. — Steve Bunce (@bigdaddybunce) October 11, 2014

Marching orders: referee Phil Bentham sends off Ben Flower of Wigan Warriors. Photo: Getty Images

Others who have seen the punch agreed with Bunce that many people have served time behind bars for less savage acts.

I wish @bennyflower nothing but success in his second career playing for Hindley Prison RFC. #WiganWarriors — Rich Slaton (@MMAcomic) October 11, 2014

Ben Flower should be arrested. To do what he did is an utter disgrace. If he did it in the street he'd be on an assault charge. Utter scum

— Mark Whitby (@twitspvfc) October 11, 2014

Just seen the Ben Flower incident. That is assault, plain and simple. Police should be involved.

— Peter Miller (@TheCricketGeek) October 11, 2014

Ben Flower should lose his job, and be sent to prison. But nothing will be said of him because he is a bloody rugby player

— George Toner (@George_Toner) October 11, 2014

Rugby league commentator Andrew Voss said Flower's "act of thuggery" was "as bad as I have ever seen," while former Canterbury Bulldogs player Steve Turner said he was "lost for words".

The number of fans and celebrities against Flower's actions was damning.

In China but just seen those punches in The Super League Grand Final on Twitter. First one was shocking but the second one was a disgrace.

— michael owen (@themichaelowen) October 11, 2014

When out and about tonight don't act like @WiganWarriorsRL Ben Flower or you will end up #bangedupinbarrow — Barrow Police (@barrowpolice) October 11, 2014

What on earth was Ben Flower thinking? To punch once is daft to punch him again when he was down is horrible. — Elizabeth (@legsidelizzy) October 11, 2014

However, many viewers have pointed out that Flower was provoked by Hohaia, which might explain his first punch on the Saints playmaker.

Replays suggest Flower pushed Hohaia over while chasing for the ball after a high bomb. With a certain try on the cards, Flower then dropped the ball to which Hohaia made a hit on him in retaliation.

Some Twitter users have suggested Hohaia deserved a square up of sorts.

I'm not defending Ben Flower at all. Just saying he did cop a beauty of an elbow right in the mush just before he threw the 1st dig.

— Joseph Barton (@Joey7Barton) October 11, 2014

How can people call Ben Flower scum, don't get me wrong the guy didn't deserve the 2nd bang but he was gonna get an elbow in his chops — AlfMan (@alfieedunn) October 11, 2014