Photo

To the Editor:

Re “Both Parties See Campaign Tilting to Republicans” (front page, Nov. 2):

I find the mood of the electorate bewildering: There is widespread dissatisfaction with President Obama’s job performance, even though he delivered a health care law that is working and will improve over time; he pulled the economy back from the precipice, even as he reduced the deficit by half from when George W. Bush was in office; and he is battling the twin plagues of Ebola and the rise of ISIS, crises not of his making, with thoughtful, measured approaches.

Still, a majority of Americans may be turning to a Republican Party that has promised diminished government, repeal of Obamacare, environmental and corporate deregulation, and further tax reductions that will balloon the deficit and vastly reduce funding of essential services.

The message from voters is wildly ambivalent: Many Americans want a severely hobbled federal government, but at the same time one that guarantees their health and safety. They want stronger government and leadership, even as they ask for less. The truth may be even more troubling: Too many Americans don’t know what they want, or care. If history is any indicator, a sizable majority of eligible voters won’t even bother to vote.

This is the real tragedy. The fault is not in our stars, it is in ourselves. We get the government we deserve. I pray I am wrong.

TONY GITTELSON

Los Angeles, Nov. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

Re “Braced for a Shift in Congress, Obama Is Setting a New Agenda” (front page, Nov. 2): Americans have grown weary of agenda-driven politics that often results in deep divisions. Why would they vote to change the players only to have the same scenes re-enacted? The only agenda the White House and Congress need right now is one with a single item on it: Work together.

ANDREA ECONOMOS

Scarsdale, N.Y., Nov. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

You write of President Obama and his aides: “Anticipating a less friendly Congress, they are mapping possible compromises with Republicans to expand trade, overhaul taxes and build roads and bridges.” Less friendly Congress? I’m not sure there’s room for that, given the unfriendliness of the past one. And I find this article, and Mr. Obama’s intent, a bit polyannaish.

The bottom line is this: The most conservative Republican members of Congress, particularly in the South, vowed to destroy this presidency on Day 1. And I don’t think that will change. They have zero interest in governing, but 100 percent interest in grandstanding, and making the president take the blame for their intransigence.

Am I cynical? You bet I am. How can anyone not be after the last six years?

CHRISTINE McMORROW

Waltham, Mass., Nov. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

Re “Cancel the Midterms,” by David Schanzer and Jay Sullivan (Op-Ed, Nov. 3): The two-year term for the House is obsolete and, more important, detrimental to our democracy. It seems that as soon as the winners of the midterm election arrive in Washington for their first day on the job, they already need to create a re-election team to raise money.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As the writers point out, elections are expensive. This fact makes our representatives more dependent on raising funds and less focused on the independent thinking needed to resolve the issues of our day.

DAN FRYDA

New York, Nov. 3, 2014

To the Editor:

Re “How Obama Lost America,” by Ross Douthat (column, Nov. 2):

Although we can debate the reasons, we cannot dispute the fact that President Obama is unpopular with the majority of Americans.

A politics built on resentment of the successful, including derision of their effort (“You didn’t build that”), a politics pitting class against class, a politics of personal identity instead of time-honored American principle and tradition, a politics that veers into autocratic executive action in the flawed belief that ends justify means, may yield electoral victory when championed by a political pied piper, but ultimately debases the commonweal.

This is the sour politics of bitterness, the corrosive politics of envy, the superficial politics of expedience. This is not optimism. There is no shining city on a hill at the end of this twisted trail but only a covetousness that demeans the founders’ experiment.

PAUL BLOUSTEIN

Cincinnati, Nov. 2, 2014

To the Editor:

Ross Douthat misses a major point: President Obama’s biggest problem is that he does not seem presidential. His leadership of the country, his party and his agenda is at best tepid at a time when strong, media-savvy leadership is called for. He also does not appear willing to engage in the necessary political fray that is Washington.

The country wants a confident, larger-than-life figure in the presidency — a Teddy Roosevelt, an F.D.R., a Ronald Reagan — and Mr. Obama fails this critical test.

JOHN MATHEWSON

Weaverville, N.C., Nov. 2, 2014