A week after he took the helm at Brookwood Medical Center, CEO Chuck Stark found himself on the operating table there, undergoing surgery for a back injury.

Talk about a unique perspective on the hospital he had just been selected to lead.

"I don't think I was treated any differently," Stark said. "I don't think anyone knew who I was yet."

They know who he is now. After spending several days in the hospital recuperating, Stark returned to the job two weeks ago and has set about spreading a management philosophy he has instilled in previous posts in Columbus, Georgia and Sandusky, Ohio.

Stark joined the hospital at a time of transition. Brookwood Medical Center, owned by Tenet Healthcare, is exploring a merger with Baptist Health System. While he was CEO of Columbus Regional Health, he oversaw a merger of hospitals that included a considerable shakeup of services between the facilities. He moved a birth center and turned an orthopedic facility into an acute care hospital with an emergency room, according to the Columbus Ledger-Enquirer.

Leadership within the hospital system also changed, with several departures after Stark took over, according to the newspaper. Columbus Regional Health System also sold the operations of its nursing homes under Stark.

Will those changes offer any clues about what might happen when the merger is complete? Until the merger is approved, Stark said he couldn't comment on any possible changes that could be in store for Brookwood and Baptist. Approval could come in late spring or early summer, Stark said. He did say that the geographic location of the five hospitals in the proposed system would make major changes less likely.

Right now, Stark said he is focusing on improving care at Brookwood, and customer service in particular.

"At this time, we are well-known for our women's services, psychiatric services, orthopedics and cardiology," Stark said. "I want to take all of our services, including neurology, ENT, urology and gastroenterology to that same level of community prominence."

At the same time, Brookwood and all hospitals are navigating new terrain under the Affordable Care Act. Several of the law's provisions are intended to improve the quality of care, and late last year, Brookwood became one of two local hospitals penalized for high numbers of hospital-acquired infections.

"It is a reality check," Stark said.

Since then, the hospital has changed procedures, he added. In January, there was not a single case of a patient suffering a catheter-acquired urinary tract infection.

Beyond the Affordable Care Act, business at Brookwood could be shaken up by the opening of Grandview Medical Center next year. But Stark has a little familiarity with that project as well. He spent 13 years in executive roles at HealthSouth and led the project the design the digital hospital that will become Grandview. It was abandoned halfway through construction when accounting irregularities at HealthSouth came to light.

Officials from Brookwood Medical Center fought Trinity Medical Center's move to the Grandview campus. An administrative law judge found that the opening of Grandview could cost Brookwood as much as $17 million a year, but recommended the project move forward anyway. Now that it is happening, Stark said the move could be good for area patients.

"Yes, the market will change," Stark said. "Competition makes you better. We are not competing with UAB, St. Vincent's or Grandview. We are looking at ourselves."