They used to be called “the golden years,” but in the latest study by the National Council on Aging about growing older in America, for many seniors those years are tarnished with fear.

Beaten, exploited and neglected are the new buzzwords associated with getting older for many seniors.

According to the National Council on Aging, up to 5 million older Americans are abused every year and the National Center on Elder Abuse is reporting a dramatic rise in elder abuse in Connecticut and across the nation.

The report becomes more troubling when it notes a huge percentage of the abuse goes unreported and the perpetrators are normally family members or caregivers. It is estimated that for every abuse case reported, 24 go unreported.

Advertisement

The National Center on Elder Abuse — one of 27 Administration on Aging-financed resource centers — defines elder abuse and neglect as intentional actions that cause harm or create a serious risk of harm (whether or not harm is intended) to a vulnerable elder by a caregiver or other person in a trusted relationship. This includes failure by a caregiver to satisfy the elder’s basic needs or to protect the elder from harm.

According to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, more than 9 percent of seniors nationwide will experience some type of abuse. The average age of the abuse victim is 77.9, with whites (66.4 percent ) more apt to experience abuse than blacks (18.7 percent) and Hispanics (10.4 percent).

Advocates say the reason seniors don’t report the abuse is they need and depend on the people abusing and neglecting them.

And here in Connecticut and across the United States, there is a lot of abuse, both physical and financial. A recent MetLife study on elder financial abuse reported the annual loss by victims of financial abuse is a staggering $2.6 billion a year.

In Groton, a woman was arrested and charged with stealing more than $160,000 from the funds she was entrusted to manage for her father.

An attorney from Winsted was accused of stealing tens of thousands of dollars from an ailing woman when he was supposed to be managing her money.

In Stoughton, Massachusetts, a woman has been charged in what police have called “one of the worst cases of elder abuse” they have seen after discovering a 75-year-old woman in a small room in the basement suffering from open bed sores, dehydrated and malnourished.

In Flint, Michigan, a 67-year-old elderly man, who weighs just 52 pounds, is clinging to life and his caregivers, which include his girlfriend and her niece, are facing charges for neglect.

The list goes on and on and world leaders are taking notice.

Pope Francis recently weighed in on the crisis, calling it “tantamount to hidden genocide.”

The World Health Organization is calling it “a violation of human rights and a significant cause of illness, injury, loss of productivity, isolation and despair.”

Some things are getting done to combat the problem.

In March 2010, the Elder Justice Act was signed into law by President Barack Obama as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Its goal was to provide federal resources to “prevent, detect, treat, understand, intervene in and, where appropriate, prosecute elder abuse, neglect and exploitation.”

And baby boomers are fighting back by starting a Facebook page warning those advancing in age to be aware.

Connecticut officials should take heed.

The state’s population is the seventh oldest in the nation, with 14 percent of state residents over 65, and 27 percent turning 65 during the next 15 years. And as Connecticut goes gray, an increase in the rate of abuse and neglect of elderly and disabled state residents is following, social services and health care professionals say.

Deb Migneault, senior policy analyst at Connecticut’s Legislative Commission on Aging, said in recent comments to the Register that “Connecticut’s demographics reflect a rapidly aging population. Without intervention, cases of elder abuse, neglect and exploitation will continue to grow.” Legislation passed last year focuses on elder abuse.

This includes an expanded the list of mandated reporters of elder abuse, requiring Connecticut’s Department of Social Services to issue an annual report to the General Assembly on the number and type of elder abuse complaints to Protective Services for the Elderly Program, and also requiring the state Department of Consumer Protection to implement a public education campaign.

The Protective Services for the Elderly Program, which is administered by the DSS Social Work Services Division, is designed to safeguard people 60 years and older from physical, mental and emotional abuse, neglect and abandonment and/or financial abuse and exploitation.

But given the disturbing statistics, the arrests that seem to happen every day, and Connecticut’s rapidly aging population, much more is needed to combat elder abuse.

To report elder abuse in Connecticut, call 860-424-5872 or visit http://www.nccafv.org/state_elder_abuse_hotlines.htm#ct