WASHINGTON (MarketWatch) — Bernie Sanders’ message is resonating with a certain age group: his own.

The New York Times writes some older Americans are responding to the 73-year-old senator’s evocation of an earlier era’s more-generous government and strong safety net. “He’s like F.D.R.,” said one 80-year-old New Hampshire woman quoted by the Times, about Sanders’ pledge to create more jobs through a trillion-dollar public works program — a plan that echoes President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal. Sanders, an independent, is challenging Hillary Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination.

Rubio to Nevada: Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, seeking the Republican nomination for president, is planning many more trips to the early-nominating state of Nevada. The Washington Post writes Rubio said Thursday he plans to be back “quite often.” The Post says that among the four early states, Nevada is perhaps the best test case for Rubio’s strategy to present himself as a new kind of Republican. “Nevada — especially Las Vegas — is much more representative of the rest of the country than Iowa and New Hampshire in many different ways,” longtime Nevada political expert Jon Ralston told the Post. “Las Vegas is a melting pot, a strong union town in a right-to-work state. It has a burgeoning Asian and Hispanic population.”

Salmon may challenge McCain: Arizona Rep. Matt Salmon is “taking a serious look” at a primary run against Sen. John McCain in 2016, a source close to the representative told National Journal. The source said the congressman has been “gratified by the strong level of support” he’s seen from supporters, and would likely make a decision by early August. If Salmon runs, it would begin what would likely be the election cycle’s most closely watched primary, pitting former Republican presidential nominee McCain against a lawmaker with the strong support of local and national conservative groups.

GOP split on health-law fix: A month before the Supreme Court is expected to rule on a key component of the Affordable Care Act, congressional Republicans are split over strategy for handling the possible fallout. The Wall Street Journal writes Republicans are divided over whether to extend temporarily the health law’s tax credits if the court voids them in most of the country. Some lawmakers say an extension would buy them time to enact a broader overhaul of the 2010 health law they oppose.

Habitat for Humanity wants relief: Habitat for Humanity is the latest group to seek relief from the Dodd-Frank Wall Street reform law. The Hill writes the housing nonprofit is fighting for an exemption from the law’s regulation that requires housing appraisers to receive “customary and reasonable” compensation. The regulation was aimed at boosting housing-market protection by making sure mortgage companies and banks wouldn’t get faulty financial advice from cheap appraisers. But the Hill writes Habitat for Humanity, which relies on appraisers who volunteer their services, says the rule has created a headache for their more than 1,400 U.S. affiliates that fear they’re bucking Dodd-Frank in accepting free appraisal services.

More from MarketWatch