COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - South Carolina’s Army National Guard is sending its first female officer to train as a commander of a combat field artillery unit.

The move by 2nd Lt. Tracci Dorgan comes in the wake of the Pentagon decision to open more combat jobs to women.

Dorgan’s route to command also involved a lot of personal effort.

She studied and trained for nearly a year to transform her military status from staff sergeant in the enlisted corps into the officer rank. That meant getting accepted into, and graduating from, the nearly yearlong course of training and study at South Carolina’s Palmetto Military Academy, where almost half the class might not finish.

“It was hard!” Dorgan said with a laugh during a recent interview. “I had to keep training during the week, just to make sure I could do the physical training on the weekends - especially the marches with a 35-pound back pack.”

The 36-year-old Eastover resident was one of several women in the class, which ended in mid-August. She is awaiting placement in a class at Fort Sill Oklahoma, where she will train five months to command units in charge of the U.S. Army’s 32-ton Paladin howitzer. The weapon looks like an armored tank with a large cannon on its top.

“I will be the first South Carolina female Guard member going there,” said Dorgan.

The Army began assigning female officers to lead artillery units in November of last year. As a National Guard officer, Dorgan will get the same training as those in the active duty ranks.

The Paladin artillery system operates with a crew of four and can fire rounds at least 15 miles on the battlefield. Pictures of the weapons were seen on U.S. television screens as they swept across Iraq during the first Gulf War.

Dorgan said she is eager to begin her new path, which includes hitting the books.

“I’m told there will be a lot of math. You need it to determine the angle of the artillery trajectory, the weapon’s plotting points,” said Dorgan. “But I’m OK with that. I took a lot of math in college and I like it.”

Dorgan said she came into the Guard more than 15 years ago as a communications specialist repairing radios. She deployed to Kuwait in 2003. During a second deployment in 2011, she worked as a public affairs specialist and accompanied the last U.S. units departing Iraq that crossed the border into Kuwait.

Lt. Col. Byron Williams, head of the Palmetto Military Academy, said the school is a major route to the officer corps for members of the Guard. But Williams said the work and study - which takes place primarily on weekends as Guard members continue with their other jobs - can prove daunting.

Up to 40 percent of a given class might have to drop it, he said.

“We hold them to a very, very high standard,” said Williams, 44. Besides classroom training in tactics, history, medical issues and leadership, Williams said the school “gets them out in the field and gets their boots on the ground - where they learn how to really lead soldiers.”

Guard soldiers from Georgia, North Carolina, Florida and Puerto Rico join the South Carolinians during their first two weeks of training, which occurs at a Guard facility on the edge of Fort Jackson outside Columbia.

They return to their respective states for the monthly training sessions and wrap up with a final two-week stint at Fort McClellan in Alabama. Women started entering the Academy in the 1970s, Williams said.

Guard spokeswoman Maj. Cindi King said there are about 9,000 soldiers in the South Carolina Guard, with 1,016 officers. Of those, 134 are females. Some 395 of the total number are graduates of the Academy.

___

Follow Susanne M. Schafer on Twitter at http://twitter.com/susannemarieap