The Clover Fire, which began midday Monday in the community of Happy Valley in California's Shasta County, has claimed one life and destroyed 68 homes. CAL FIRE expects to contain the blaze by Sunday.

The Clover Fire, which began midday Monday in the community of Happy Valley in California's Shasta County, has claimed one life and destroyed 68 homes. CAL FIRE expects to contain the blaze by Sunday. FEMA

The Clover Fire in Northern California's Shasta County is expected to be contained by Sunday, according to reports issued by California fire officials. Meanwhile, the remains of Brian Stanley Henry, 55, have been discovered on Wednesday evening located within the fire perimeter near Coal Pit Road, according to a press release issued by Lt. Mark Lillibridge of the Shasta County Sheriff's Office. The cause of death was not known though an investigation is underway, CAL FIRE spokeswoman Lori Mathiesen told NBC News.

CAL FIRE reports the fire had burned nearly 8,000 acres and was about 65 percent contained as of 10 am this morning. The fire began around midday Monday near Clear Creek Road in the community of Happy Valley, which is about 150 miles north of Sacramento. Along with the one death, 68 residences and 128 outbuildings have been destroyed, while an additional five residences and 10 outbuildings have sustained damaged.

Officials called for mandatory evacuations of Happy Valley, Igo, Cotton Wood and other areas in Shasta County, The Los Angeles Times reports. The fire grew quickly because of gusty winds and dry conditions, officials told the newspaper. A total of 1,502 fire personnel assembled into 37 crews which manned 159 fire engines and one tanker have been deployed in the suppression effort. CAL FIRE has recorded 5,329 wildfires, scorching a total of 123,241 acres, so far this year.

The Clover Fire, which began midday Monday in the community of Happy Valley in California's Shasta County, has claimed one life and destroyed 68 homes. CAL FIRE expects to contain the blaze by Sunday. Garrett Frey