WASHINGTON -- With the many workforce questions circling healthcare today -- short supply, maldistribution, lack of primary care clinicians -- many believe it would be great to have a national commission that could study these issues and recommend strategies to overcome them.

Fortunately, one does exist. It was created by the Affordable Care Act and has even had 15 members appointed by the Government Accountability Office.

Sadly, the National Health Care Workforce Commission, as it is called, has yet to meet because Congress hasn't granted it any funding. Money wasn't even included in last week's congressional compromise over spending for the rest of fiscal 2014.

The lack of funding is troubling for medical groups because it could mean that workforce issues that perplex policymakers may continue to be unresolved.

Although groups like the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) analyze workforce issues, their results often come with a political agenda. An independent commission, much like the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC), would provide a clear voice to rise above the political rhetoric.

The American College of Physicians listed several objectives for the commission's work:

Provide recommendations on national health workforce priorities, goals, and policies

Review current and projected healthcare workforce supply and demand

Assess education and training activities to determine whether demand for healthcare workers is being met

Analyze and make recommendations for eliminating the barriers to entering and staying in primary care

More than 40 national organizations wrote Congress in November 2012 asking for just $3 million for the commission to get off the ground.

"It's a hard battle for anything new [to receive funding from Congress these days], and then on top of that, for it to be something that was authorized in the ACA makes it that much harder," Tannaz Rasouli, director of government relations at the AAMC here, told MedPage Today in a telephone interview.

There is some good news around this issue. Congress, in the spending bill it passed last week, nearly doubled the appropriations of the National Center for Workforce Analysis, an arm of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). Its budget jumped from nearly $2.6 million in fiscal 2013 to $4.7 million in fiscal 2014.

"I think that reflects that lawmakers on both sides of the aisle recognize that we need to be doing more in terms of the workforce and that workforce is an important issue to pay attention to," Rasouli said.

But the HRSA center is more of a "numbers cruncher," Rasouli said, while the commission is designed to take a broader look at policy and make recommendations to Congress on ways to address issues.

There is a lot that the commission could be doing now that -- due to lack of funding -- it is not.

"The work of the commission is important and we need to see that funded," Rasouli said. "We know we are facing shortages of health professionals and for those communities that are already short of health professionals ... we need to be doing things to get those professionals into those communities so that we're meeting their needs."

Pay and Practice is a blog by David Pittman for readers with an interest in health policy.