The U.S. Supreme Court is expected to rule this month on the ramifications of a few words in the Affordable Care Act, and the decision could wipe away insurance subsidies for some 286,000 Virginians.

It could also create a ripple effect that would disrupt the insurance and health care market, affecting people without taxpayer subsidies as a sudden funding loss unbalances the system.

"It could be a crisis for the market," said Doug Gray, executive director of the Virginia Association of Health Plans.

"This could (also) be like Y2K," Gray said, referring to the 1990s panic that the shift from the year 1999 to the year 2000 would create havoc with the world's computers. "It could be that we get all excited about it and the court doesn't rule."

Uncertainty is the only definite. The court case hinges on state policy, and Virginia leaders are paying close attention. But it's unclear how they will react if the case tears away an underpinning of Obamacare.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe's administration won't divulge whatever plans it has, though it sent at least one key official to Chicago earlier this month for a multistate confab on the matter. House Republicans, who hold a veto-proof majority, have made it clear they're not interested in an obvious change that would let subsidies flow — eventually — regardless of the court's decision.

The legislature will not, GOP leaders said, establish a state-run health care exchange.

There is room, however, to talk about temporary executive actions to help avoid the biggest upheavals, according to Del. John O'Bannon, a medical doctor and House GOP point man on health issues.

"I would not be surprised if the governor and the secretary of health declared an emergency," said O'Bannon, R-Richmond. "These are things that I think we could look at, but there are a lot of moving parts."

The case at hand is called King v. Burwell, and it was brought by four Virginians arguing against an ACA mandate that requires most people to carry health insurance. Their legal team took issue with an Internal Revenue Service ruling that allowed federal subsidies to flow in states, such as Virginia, that never established their own exchanges to sell policies.

The Affordable Care Act authorizes subsidies on policies purchased through exchanges "established by the state." In Virginia and 33 other states, the exchanges are run by the federal government.

U.S. District Court Judge James R. Spencer dismissed this case last year, saying the plaintiffs' argument had "a certain common-sense appeal," but shows itself implausible "when statutory context is taken into account."

The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals backed Spencer's decision in a unanimous opinion. But on the same day, judges on the D.C. appeals circuit went the opposite way, ruling against subsidies in states without their own exchanges.

With other cases pending on the same issue, the U.S. Supreme Court said it would take up the issue, with King v. Burwell as the vehicle. Oral arguments were held in March, with a ruling expected this month. The case is named for David King of Fredericksburg and Sylvia Mathews Burwell, the U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services.

Three other Virginians are also plaintiffs in the case: Brenda Levy of Richmond, Douglas Hurst of Virginia Beach and Rose Luck of Petersburg. Attempts to reach them, as well as King, were not successful.

An end to the subsidies wouldn't just affect people receiving them, but potentially everyone with insurance. A recent paper from the National Academy for State Health Policy predicts that, without federal subsidies, younger and healthier people will drop coverage. That would leave people in poorer health in the pool used to set prices, "which may result in higher premium rates."

Gray backed that interpretation, as have other experts. Michael Cannon, a conservative policy analyst whose 2012 writings helped spark King v. Burwell and similar lawsuits, wrote last year that a successful suit would also free employers, and individuals, from various mandates in Obamacare, eroding other key elements of the health care reform.

McAuliffe spokesman Brian Coy said the administration is "confident" the Supreme Court will allow the subsidies to continue. If not, McAuliffe will "do everything in his power to make sure people continue to get the access to care they have had."

"I'm not going to get into the nitty gritty about exactly what will happen," Coy said. "A lot of it's hypothetical."

Virginia Secretary of Health and Human Services Bill Hazel said he sent Deputy Secretary Joe Flores to Chicago earlier this month to discuss plans with other state officials from around the country. Flores was also consulted on the National Academy paper, which delves into possible state-based responses if the Supreme Court rules against the Obama administration.

The Wall Street Journal reported on the Chicago conference, saying the event was funded by a health policy foundation called the Milbank Memorial Fund. Hazel said everyone was essentially on the same page, and there are not a lot of options.

The National Academy's paper lays out several, but many of them would cost hundreds of millions of dollars to implement and require a political sea change in states that declined to create exchanges. They would also take months or longer to put in place, the paper notes. The cheapest state exchange, Idaho's, took more than $105 million in federal funding to build.

Perhaps the simplest response is for states to designate the federal exchange as their state exchange, as if the federal government were a contractor. The ACA "does not appear to bar" this, the academy's paper states, but the move would require legislative or executive action.

It's possible, though, that the court will lay out a road map in its decision, giving states a way to wind down or salvage subsidies. O'Bannon said he hopes Congress will address the issue, and he called the potential verdict "an opportunity for Washington to get its act together."