News 9 viewer Brian Walling sent this photo of a grass fire near Calumet.

News 9 viewer Erica Wenzel sent this photo of a grass fire burning in Rush Springs.

Fire crews are battling multiple grass fires in several Oklahoma counties Sunday afternoon.

Lincoln County



According to Joey Wakefield with Lincoln County Emergency Management, as of 1 p.m., crews are battling four grass fires in Lincoln County.

State Highway 102 at County Road 1020 is shut down due to a fire crossing the highway.

The grass fires in Lincoln County were all under control as of 8 p.m. Sunday. Firefighters are still mopping up areas. All 17 fire departments were used. One mobile home burned at highway 102 and County Road 1020. A barn burned at highway 18b and County Road 3400.

Canadian County

At about 1 p.m., El Reno firefighters confirmed that they are helping fight a grass fire at Jones and Maberry near Calumet.

Crews are also battling a grass fire at 4809 Smoking Oaks Dr. in Yukon.

Oklahoma County



Oklahoma City firefighters have put out a grass fire at 9228 Snowberry Dr. in Oklahoma City Sunday afternoon. Just before 2 p.m., firefighters are responding to another grass fire at 4904 S.W. 126th Terrace.

At about 2:15 p.m. authorities confirmed that fire crews are fighting a grass fire at S. Hiwassee and S.E. 149th in Oklahoma City.

At about 2:30 p.m. firefighters are responding to another grass fire at 9500 N.W. 4th Street.

A small grass fire cropped up near 1201 Mustang Rd., in Mustang, Okla. near the Wild Horse Park softball fields. A fire was also reported at 13600 S. Harrah Rd. it is unclear if any structures are being threatened in these areas at this time.

Logan County

Fire crews have requested additional help to fight a large grass fire in Guthrie. The fire is affecting the area of Highway 33, and Post Road to the north.

According to Guthrie News Page, fire crews are now having to respond to a second fire near College and Kelly behind Cimarron Golf Course.

According to Guthrie Fire Chief Eric Harlow, fire crews are just starting to be able to get a handle on the fire in Logan County. About 15 to 25 residences were evacuated. He says approximately six structures have been lost, many believed to be abandoned, and several hay bales.

Grady County



Chickasha firefighters are fighting a large grass fire just north of Rush Springs along Highway 81.

Nowata County

Authorities shut down US 60 at County Road NS 409, three miles west of Nowata in Nowata County, due to a large grass fire and smoke blowing across the roadway. The road was re-opened at 3:45 p.m.



Payne County



Firefighters also battled a large grass fire in Payne County. State Highway 51 between Council Valley and Battle Ridge Road was closed for about 40 minutes due to the grass fire crossing the highway.

A Red Flag warning is in effect until 6 p.m. Sunday for several counties, including Beckham County, Caddo County, Custer County, Grady County, Roger Mills County, and Washita County.

Details of the Red Flag Warning



News 9 is working to gather more information about the fires. Stay with News 9 and News9.com for updates.