× Republican presidential candidate Jim Gilmore: You Decide 2016

Campaign ended: Feb. 12, 2016

Current position: None

Career: Virginia Governor 1998-2002, Republican National Committee Chairman 2001, Virginia Attorney General 1994-1997

Hometown: Richmond, Virginia

Family: Married to Roxanne Gatling

Religion: Methodist

On the issues:

Economy: Gilmore wants to cut taxes, reduce business taxes to 15 percent, eliminate the death tax and create three simple tax brackets. He criticizes President Barack Obama’s regulations, which he says stifle our economic growth.

Education: The ex-RNC chair is against Common Core and is in favor of proving adorable public higher education.

Environment: Gilmore opposes “cap and trade” plans that would implement regulations on the energy industry.

Gun control/rights: “There is far too much violent crime in America. But that fact does not arise from the right of Americans to keep and bear arms,” Gilmore says. He supports mental health professionals identifying the dangerously mentally ill and installing ballistic-resistant doors on classrooms.

Health care: Gilmore is another GOP candidate who wishes to repeal the Affordable Care Act. According to his website, he would promote Health Savings Accounts and Association Health Plans, while enacting malpractice reform and providing tax deductions for income spent on health insurance. While governor, he signed a partial birth abortion ban.

Immigration: The former governor supports securing our borders and preventing those who have already been deported from reentering the United States. “Those who entered illegally years ago- those who pay their taxes, who work hard to assimilate into our culture, who obey our laws and system of government and learned to speak our language- should be give the ability to work legally,” Gilmore says on his website.

National security: Gilmore says the United State should defend itself and its allies, and should never engage in indecisive wars.

Social issues: Gilmore is against gay marriage and civil unions.

Social:

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/gilmoreforamerica/

Twitter: https://twitter.com/gov_gilmore

Website: http://www.gilmoreforamerica.com/