2014 was a year marked by a number of head-scratching Supreme Court decisions. Though Care2 covered each case as it happened throughout the year, here’s a look back at some of the worst rulings that have established some disconcerting precedents for the United States.

1. Burwell v Hobby Lobby

Hobby Lobby fought against the Affordable Care Act, hoping to avoid having to pay for contraceptives for its employees. The now infamous Burwell v Hobby Lobby case set some really frightening precedent – now private corporations are allowed to have a religious identity and can opt out of certain government mandates based on “moral” grounds.

In addition to being a significant blow for Obamacare, it’s also a major setback for women, and women’s reproductive health in particular. When companies have the opportunity to block female employees from birth control and emergency contraceptives, women essentially have their bosses making health decisions on their behalves. That’s not equality, that’s typical patriarchy.

2. McCutcheon v Federal Election Commission

In April, it looked like the Supreme Court might get a second chance to fix or at least modify their previous (and devastating) Citizens United decision. Instead, McCutcheon v Federal Election Commission resulted in expanding the boundaries of Citizens United. Shaun McCutcheon argued that his First Amendment rights were stifled by limitations forbidding him from giving the maximum campaign contribution allowed to as many candidate as he wants. The conservative faction of the Supreme Court ultimately agreed, thereby allowing wealthy citizens to give money to every single politician in Congress if he or she wants.

In doing so, the Supreme Court made it even easier for people and corporations to be able to pay politicians to vote according to their private interests. Despite the readily apparent problems that stem from this decision, Justice Anthony Kennedy wrote that this change would “not give rise to corruption.”

3. Integrity Staffing Solutions, Inc. v Jesse Busk and Laurie Castro

The Supreme Court sided with corporations and against low-wage workers. Thanks to a questionable ruling in Integrity Staffing Solutions, Inc. v Jesse Busk and Laurie Castro, employers will have a much easier time not compensating for extra work performed outside of clocked in hours.

The case was filed by upset Amazon employees who were made to wait after each shift to get searched by a security team to ensure that staff was not stealing merchandise. To cut costs, Amazon had downsized its security team, forcing staffers to stay in line for about half an hour after their shifts ended. That’s a lot of uncompensated time, especially for workers who receive not much more than minimum wage. Alas, the Supreme Court didn’t believe that these workers had the right to be paid for having to wait around their place of work so long, and now this type of activity can continue.

4. Town of Greece v Galloway

The supposed separation between church and state got even blurrier in May when the Supreme Court gave thumbs up to communities that use Christian prayers to kick off their official town council meetings. In Town of Greece v Galloway, Greece, New York residents Susan Galloway and Linda Stephens (one Jewish, one atheist) felt excluded and uncomfortable with their town’s regular Christ-heavy prayers and felt like the town was pushing a specific religion on those who attended the meetings.

According to five of the justices, however, there is a major distinction between “coercion” and “endorsement.” Although previous Supreme Courts have disagreed with this sort of sentiment, apparently, five of the current justices believe that it’s okay to celebrate Christianity in government proceedings, so long as they’re not literally forcing people to subscribe to that religion.

5. Heien v North Carolina

It’s peculiar to think that the same people called upon to enforce the law of the land do not have to actually know the law to do their jobs, but that’s the stance the Supreme Court took in a near-unanimous decision on Heien v North Carolina. Although Officer Matt Darisse pulled over Nicholas Heien without proper legal justification, the Supreme Court decided that since Darisse thought he was in the right at the time, the drug possession charges that ensued could stand.

As the justices see it, if a police officer could reasonably be ignorant of the law (whatever that means), it’s acceptable for them to not follow protocol. Be warned – that same privilege is not afforded to the average United States citizens. Non-officers are still expected to follow the laws whether they know them or not.