Blue Cross Blue Shield rolls into Aiken to help uninsured avoid double penalties.

Augusta, GA – It’s health insurance enrollment time for everyone across the country. But if you don’t work for a big company or have a job at all, it can be a grueling task.

There are more than 400,000 people uninsured in South Carolina and the penalty doubles for them this year. For instance, a single person could pay close to $700 during tax time.

A Blue Cross Blue Shield media specialist reports there were 500,000 people uninsured in the Palmetto State three years ago.

Jack Neville tucked a blue folder from the health insurance provider under his arm. That folder held information that will keep him alive next year.

“I got health issues. I got to go to the heart doctor things like that. I need insurance,” Jack Neville explained.

He and Bobbie Neville signed up for a third year of health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, something they said will save them a lot of money.

“If you go for a cath [cardiac catheterization] that’s around $12,000. I don’t see how anybody can just say ‘I’m not going to get insurance I’m just going to pay $12,000’ if they had to have something like that done,” Bobbie Neville told News Channel 6.

Blue Cross Blue Shield agents are talking with the uninsured this week inside the big, blue RV camped outside Planet Fitness on Whiskey Road in Aiken.

Sr. Media Relations Specialist Brian Scoles was on hand at the RV.

“We’re trying to bring insurance right here to everybody’s home town,” he said.

Scoles told us the penalty doubles for people who don’t have insurance this year. So his company is making sure people get signed up in the marketplace.

“They can take advantage of 21 different plans with Blue Cross Blue Shield or they can take advantage of one of 31 plans for Blue Choice Health Plans this year,” he said.

As for the Neville family, rechecking their plan saved some cash.

Bobbie said of the health insurance agent, “He said that if we kept the plan that we had it would be $175 I think. He wrote us up another plan for $135 so that’s a good little difference in there.”

Just to give you an idea of the penalties, a family of four could pay $2,085. That’s 2.5 percent of their total household income. If you have children, the penalty for each child would cost around $350.

“42 percent of Americans have said that by the time they get done paying for their health insurance premiums and/or their medications for throughout the year that places a significant financial burden throughout the house hold,” Scoles said. “We’re trying to encourage people this open enrollment season to come out and talk to one of our agents.”

The RV will be in Aiken outside Planet Fitness on Whiskey Road until Wednesday between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. The RV will return December 28-31. The agents prefer that people call first, but they will still take walk ups. The number to call is 855.382.2583. Click here for more information.