Community Health Systems (NYSE:CYH) stock fell more than 10% today, based on a downgrade by Raymond James, as it cited the Quorum Health Corp. spin-off as a negative development for the company. On the contrary, Oppenheimer commented positively on the news. It seems that the investors are taking Raymond James’ opinion on the matter, as is evident by the stock price downfall.

In the morning today, Raymond James analyst John Ransom downgraded CYH stock from Market Perform to Underperform. The analyst argued that the recently-announced Quorum spin-off is not a sound financial decision, as it adds up more costs, especially the increased interest expenses.

Mr. Ransom also mentioned that the decision creates higher leverage for Community Health, along with the technical pressure on Quorum’s share due to the market capitalization considerations. He noted that the standalone companies are likely to earn less money, as opposed to the combined entity.

On the other hand, Oppenheimer analyst Michael Wiederhorn sees the spin-off as a substantial positive that adds up for improvement in the portfolio, given Quorum’s recent underperformance and further potential penetration of the Affordable Care Act. The analyst believes that the benefits may include improved margins, improved liquidity, and reduced exposure to poor-growth markets. He maintained an Outperform rating on CYH shares, along with a $35 target price.

At present, CYH stock is trading down 8.11% at $19.15, as of 2:32 PM EDT. The stock has lost over 27% value year-to-date (YTD), primarily on the back of weaker-than-expected fourth quarter of fiscal 2015 (4QFY15) results, disclosed in mid-February.

On April 1, the company disclosed that its Board has approved the Quorum Health Corp. spin-off. Pursuant to this, each CYH common stock entitles its owner to receive a stock of Quorum Health Corporation (NYSE:QHC)—the new independent company. The stock will be given to the shareholders, as of April 22. The spin-off is likely to be effective by April 29.