By Jim Fair, Editor

Published on Monday, January 20, 2014

Enlarge photo Julie McCombs Rev. Earl Simmons of Maple Creek Baptist Church was the keynote speaker Monday at the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. celebration luncheon at Greer City Hall.



Enlarge photo Julie McCombs LeAndra Sligh performed a dramatic interpretation of Maya Angelou's poem, "Still I Rise."



Enlarge photo Jim Fair Wayne Griffin recognized City Administrator Ed Driggers for his and the city's support of the annual MLK Celebration luncheon. Far left is Justin Miller of the Parks and Recreation staff.



Enlarge photo Julie McCombs Sammy Dotson provided spiritual songs as part of the MLK Celebration.





• Hear Rev. Simmons

• See Gallery

Rev. Earl Simmons said Terrell Hampton’s act was a tough one to follow.

Simmons wasn’t kidding.

Hampton gave a stirring dramatic interpretation of the Martin Luther King Jr. speech, “I Have a Dream”. The Beck Academy student received a standing ovation for his portrayal of the icon of the civil rights movement.

What Hampton did was warm up the capacity turnout at Greer City Hall who came to celebrate the birthday of King, traditionally the third Monday in January.

Simmons’ message was “We’re not there yet” reminding the audience of current events bringing into question equal treatment for minority races. “It’s symbolic of Dr. King’s dream, but we’re not there yet,” Simmons said. “But we’re still pursuing the dream.”

Wayne Griffin, Greer city councilman, who organized the 12th MLK Celebration in Greer, emphasized the participation of youth. The dramatic interpretations have been a hallmark of Griffin’s programs.

“We want to inspire our youth and that’s one of the things I wanted to do with this program,” Griffin said. His nieces led the Pledge of Allegiance to begin the program. LeAndra Sligh and Tymetrious Bolden gave interpretations of Maya Angelou poems “Still I Rise” and “Phenomenal Woman”.

Sammy Dotson, Program Director at Phillis Wheatley Association, provided music with his associates.

Stephania Talley-Priester was the recipient of a Samaritan Award for her contributions to the community through New Horizons, explaining the Affordable Care Act, hosting a show on a gospel network and working with youth through her Jazzy Fashion business.

Griffin recognized City Administrator Ed Driggers for spearheading the city’s contributions supporting MLK Celebrations and other events and programs. Griffin tried to keep the recognition a secret, going as far as leaving Driggers off the program.

“I didn’t even ask if Mr. Driggers would be here because I knew he would,” Griffin said.