Veronica Patterson

Award-winning pianists Miroslava Mintcheva and David McArthur will join forces with poet Veronica Patterson in a unique multi-media performance entitled "Elegance and Decadence," as the Estes Park Music Festival Winter Series winds down. The concert is Sunday, May 18 at 2 p.m. in the Stanley Hotel Concert Hall. Music, poetry and artwork intertwine in an illuminating presentation, featuring masterpieces by J.C. Bach, Beethoven, Liszt, Shostakovich, Rachmaninoff and Lutoslawski.

Mintcheva and McArthur each hold doctor of musical arts degrees from the University of Colorado at Boulder. They have performed solo and duo recitals throughout the U.S. and abroad, including concerts in Italy, Canada, the Czech Republic and Bulgaria. They were recently selected as one of four finalists nationally in the 2013 Ellis-Duo Piano Competition.

Dr. Mintcheva has been featured in numerous recitals and competitions. In 2009, she won the 12th Simone Belsky International Piano Competition in Hartford, Connecticut and in the same year gave her New York debut at Merkin Concert Hall as the second prizewinner in the American Protégé International Piano Competition. She was also a finalist in the 2009 International Web Concert Hall Music Competition, and a semi-finalist in the 2011 Beethoven Sonata International Piano Competition. A dedicated teacher, she served as Visiting Assistant Professor of Piano at Florida Southern College. She has previously taught at the University of Colorado-Boulder, Colorado State University, and Front Range Community College.

Advertisement

Dr. McArthur has taught piano and theory both at the university level and privately. An avid collaborator, he has performed with various chamber groups, as well as with the Fort Collins Symphony, Cheyenne Symphony, and Opera Fort Collins. McArthur specializes in the research and performance of 20th-century piano repertoire. David has helped audiences gain a deeper appreciation of new works through innovative programming and informative in-concert talks. Dr. McArthur is currently on staff at the Colorado State University Department of Music, Theater, and Dance, where he serves as Music Director for the Ballet Division. He is also Music Director at First Baptist Church in Loveland, Colorado.

Dr. Patterson has published three full-length collections of poetry: How to Make a Terrarium (Cleveland State University, 1987), Swan, What Shores? (New York Press, 2000), and Thresh & Hold (Big Pencil Press, 2009). She has also published a chapbook of prose poems, This is the Strange Part (Pudding House Publications, 2002), and a collection of poetry and photography, The Bones Remember: A Dialogue, with photographer Ronda Stone. Patterson has been awarded artists' residencies at the Ucross Foundation, Rocky Mountain National Park, Hedgebrook, the Ragdale Foundation and the Gell Center. Dr. Patterson has received Individual Artist's Fellowships from the Colorado Council on the Arts.

The music festival concludes the 2013-2014 winter series season with this award winning multimedia concert. Mark your calendars for July 14, 28, and August 4 for the spectacular Colorado Music Festival Chamber Orchestra. All summer concerts are held in the Stanley Concert Hall on Monday nights at 7:30 p.m.

For further more , contact the music festival business office at 970-586-9519 or visit estesparkmusicfestival.org. To receive weekly updates of concerts and upcoming events, send an e-mail to epmfinfo2@yahoo.com. Subscription packages are available at the door on the day of the concert or Hobert Office Services, 1140 Manford Ave, Estes Park, CO. Additional parking is available behind the hotel main building.

If you go

What: "Elegance and Decadence" 14 Ways of Looking at a Piano. Multi Media with Music, Artwork and Poetry

When: Sunday, May 18 - 2 p.m.

Where: Stanley Hotel Concert Hall

Cost: $10 at the door or save by subscription: Buy your packet of tickets for next season! Save two dollars per ticket. No expiration date. $80 for a block of ten tickets. Children and students admitted free.

More info: This concert is sponsored by Judy and Bob Taphorn. The Winter Series 2013-2014 was dedicated to friend and founding member, Mal Walker.