Michigan's Medicaid program could be model for nation, says UM health researcher

John Ayanian, M.D., thinks Michigan's newly minted bill that authorizes the expansion of the state's Medicaid program to nearly 2.5 million people on April 1 is a model for the nation — at least for the 17 states that have Republican governors and legislative majorities and have not yet approved Medicaid expansion bills.

"This is one of few examples where Republicans and Democrats came up with the same approach (to combine) public and private goals to afford Medicaid expansion for the people in Michigan," said Ayanian, director of the University of Michigan's Institute for Health Care Policy and Innovation.

"With the current gridlock in Washington, D.C., Michigan's approach represents a model for the nation," said Ayanian, a native of New Jersey who moved to Michigan last month from Boston, where he was a professor at Harvard University.

So far, 25 states have agreed to expand Medicaid, a process that the Supreme Court last year required as part of its approval of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.

On Sept. 16, Gov. Rick Snyder signed into law his "Healthy Michigan" plan that could add up to 475,000 low-income people into Medicaid. The expansion will cover adults making up to 133 percent of the poverty level — $15,500 for an individual, $26,500 for a family of three.

In a September 25 report in the New England Journal of Medicine, Ayanian said Snyder's innovative approach — that required working with both political parties to garner enough votes for passage — featured five core principles:

The state must achieve sufficient savings to offset its contributions for Medicaid expansion when federal funding drops from 100 percent to 95 percent in 2014, and then phasing down to 90 percent by 2021.

Michigan will develop financial incentives, including co-payments, for the new Medicaid enrollees to control their use of health care and to maintain healthy behaviors.

New Medicaid beneficiaries will be enrolled directly into the state's Medicaid HMOs rather than fee-for-service Medicaid.

New enrollees will be guaranteed access to primary care and preventive services. They also will be offered to sign advance directives for end-of-life care.

Several studies will be conducted over the next several years to determine how well Medicaid expansion is controlling costs and improving quality. For example, a new Health Care Cost and Quality Advisory Committee will be created to promote quality and transparency of information.

But Ayanian said one of Snyder's more innovative provisions requires the state to set aside half of the savings from Medicaid expansion to fund the state's additional costs for at least 15 years.

Under Snyder's "lock-box" health savings account plan, estimated savings to Michigan from reduced costs of the state's mental health and prison health programs could total $983 million from 2014 to 2023, said a report by Ann Arbor-based Center for Healthcare Research & Transformation.

However, if predictions of savings do not materialize, Michigan could withdraw from Medicaid expansion as early as 2017.

Medicaid expansion is part of a strategy to ensure that nearly all Americans have health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

One barrier to successfully expanding Medicaid some have expressed is whether there are enough physicians in Michigan to take care of larger numbers of patients.

"Concerns about access to primary care in Massachusetts (from 2006-2008, when Romneycare was adopted) were based more on anecdotal reports," said Ayanian, who was a practicing physician in Boston during that time.

"Everyone (businesses, hospitals, physicians) was in favor of expanding coverage," he said. "It helped to improve financial resources, and it also had the potential of improving quality of care."

Ayanian said Healthy Michigan has several features that encourage care coordination, improving quality and reducing costs. One controversial provision is charging co-payments to certain Medicaid beneficiaries.

"Co-pays have been used in some state Medicaid programs," Ayanian said. "There is not an extensive body of evidence on the effect of co-pays in the Medicaid population. … It is a crude tool to reduce costs and unnecessary care."

But Ayanian believes the co-pays will not discourage people from enrolling in Medicaid. The bill does not offer specific penalties for beneficiaries if they can't afford to make the co-pays.

Most experts predict that physicians and hospitals, which are required to collect the co-payments, will end up writing off uncollected co-payments.

The bill also requires the state Department of Community Health to hold a symposium this fall on the overuse of emergency departments. A report is due by December 2014 to the state Legislature on best practices.

The Michigan Department of Financial and Insurance Services also is required to examine financial reports of health insurance companies to determine the impact that reduced uncompensated care has on insurance rates.

"There is an expectation that reducing uncompensated care for those on Medicaid will reduce cost-shifting to private employers," Ayanian said. "This could be a benefit of the expansion to all businesses and families."

Ayanian said studies like these will help Michigan evaluate how cost-effective expanding Medicaid is on the state budget, families and businesses.

Other provisions in the Healthy Michigan bill include:

Hospitals must accept 115 percent of Medicare rates as payments for uninsured with annual income up to 250 percent of federal poverty level.

Savings to Michigan from the plan's first year — estimated at $193 million to the state's general fund — can be used to improve roads or be placed in the state's "rainy day" fund.

By Sept. 30, 2015, Community Health would have to develop and implement a plan to enroll all existing fee-for-service enrollees into contracted health plans.

A requirement that health plans use the concept called "value-based insurance design" to encourage use of low-cost and high-value health care services.

For example, beneficiaries would be charged higher co-pays for using expensive hospital emergency departments for care that could be provided at a physician's office.

The University of Michigan has pioneered value-based insurance design. Provisions for its use area are included in Healthy Michigan and Obamacare.

Allows for services provided by telemedicine from a practitioner who is licensed, registered, or otherwise authorized under the state public health laws.

"By linking Michigan's Medicaid expansion to market-oriented changes in this federal-state program, the governor and Legislature have created a pragmatic pathway for linking Republican and Democratic priorities for health care," Ayanian said in his report.

Related Links