Gov. Scott Walker talks foreign policy during a speech on the campus of The Citadel in late August. Credit: Associated Press

If, as Ralph Waldo Emerson once wrote, "foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds," Scott Walker's giant brain would be bursting from his head.

In the short time since his early front-runner status as a potential GOP presidential nominee, Walker has fumbled away the strongest point in his favor — his consistency. In the early phases of the campaign, the thing that set him apart was the very thing he now lacks: credibility.

The last few weeks have been especially tough, given Walker's trifecta of positions on the issue of birthright citizenship and his apparent support of building a wall on the U.S.-Canada border. Perhaps one can chalk the latter up as a verbal tic by which Walker politely answers "yeah," or "absolutely" to every question he is asked. But it seemed to take him days — after every "but it would keep Justin Bieber out" joke had been made — to correct the record.

What frustrates Walker supporters is that this isn't the Walker they have gotten to know in his career in Wisconsin government. The Wisconsin Walker is the one who stood firm in the face of hundreds of thousands of protesters on the steps of the Capitol. The one who emerged from a historic recall election that put him under a searing national spotlight. They expected the Walker who never withered under criticism when he signed concealed carry for firearms into law, pushed voter identification and expanded health care in the state while still resisting the allure of Obamacare's Medicaid expansion funds.

Yet this new guy — the one who tends to form a perimeter around issues with multiple positions — illuminates a main difference between National Walker and Wisconsin Walker. Scott Walker is masterful at running against Democrats, but he's terrible at running against Republicans.

It's one thing to take a principled stand against big government liberalism — it's entirely another to navigate the negative space between 18 like-minded conservatives. And Walker has a deli-thin space in which to wiggle. He has to set himself apart from his opponents, but not say anything crazy to do so.

In several instances, the desire to outflank other conservatives has had Walker taking positions with which he's clearly uncomfortable. When he appeared to oppose birthright citizenship, it reminded me of the times I had to tell my mother her meatloaf was delicious. It wasn't in keeping with anything he had said during his last two decades in Wisconsin government.

Remember in 2010, when Walker voiced opposition to Arizona's controversial new law that would have granted police more latitude in questioning suspected illegal immigrants? Walker was initially concerned that the law might have resulted in increased racial profiling, but after "researching the issue more and obtaining new information," he quickly changed his position.

At the time, he was being hammered by his Republican gubernatorial opponent Mark Neumann, which was most likely the cause of his conversion on the issue. Sound familiar?

On the other hand, when Walker runs against Democrats, he is, as he likes to say, "Unintimidated." But when he sees a Republican sneaking up to siphon away his voters, he's like an elephant seeing a mouse.

As a presidential candidate, Walker was never as good as his early polling suggested, and he isn't nearly as bad as his recent numbers show. But if he wants to revive his chances, he's going to have to remind people of the Walker who showed backbone in the face of substantial public backlash.

It often seems as if we'll find the Milwaukee Lion before we find that Walker again — and by then, it may be too late. Unfortunately for Walker, revealing his true self will take another image makeover — one that at this point, the public may not buy.

Christian Schneider is a Journal Sentinel columnist and blogger. Email cschneider@jrn.com. Twitter: @Schneider_CM