The last time Largo businessman Tom Beckwith was in the spotlight, he was fighting and winning a battle over the birth control mandate in the Affordable Care Act.

Saturday, Beckwith Electric will become part of the presidential campaign as the Pinellas County company hosts a rally for Sen. Marco Rubio.

In 2013, Beckwith Electric won the right to be exempted from provisions in the health care law requiring employers to provide free birth control as part of their insurance coverage. A devout Christian, Beckwith objected to certain forms of birth control that he considers tantamount to providing abortions. The battle, fought by companies around the country, went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, which sided with the businesses against the government.

Beckwith’s company, which makes devices that protect and control large power generators, transformers and lines, employes about 150 people, some of whom Beckwith says may attend the rally today. Others, who have different political beliefs, may skip it, he said.

“We all have free spirits to decide what we want,” Beckwith told The Tampa Tribune. “My employees are all over the map. I love them.”

Even when Beckwith was fighting his legal battle, some employees told a reporter in front of their boss that they didn’t agree with his position.

And even as he prepared to welcome Rubio to his company, Beckwith said Friday he doesn’t know how he is going to vote in the Republican presidential primary on Tuesday.

“I think we’re blessed to have some really good candidates to choose from, really quality people,” Beckwith said, mentioning his admiration for some of those who have dropped out, including Ben Carson, Mike Huckabee, Jeb Bush and Ron Paul. “There’s so much I like about all of them, some a little bit more than others.”

Before he votes, he said, “I’m going to sit down and talk with God about it, pray about it.”

Beckwith said he’s gone to various events for the different candidates to hear what they had to say. When he went to a grand opening for Rubio’s St. Petersburg office, he said he suggested having the candidate talk to his employees. He didn’t expect to host a rally.

But then the campaign reached out to him, and Beckwith agreed.

On Friday, he said, preparations were being made to accommodate the campaign, the media and the public. And although Beckwith makes electric equipment, it had to hire electricians to lay eight 20-amp cables to supply power for the event.

This, Beckwith said, is costing “a few coins,” he expects to pay out of his own pocket as his contribution to the democratic process.

Beckwith said his beliefs line up with the Republican Party when it comes to abortion, international affairs and cutting regulations. But he hopes to influence the party to have more compassion toward undocumented immigrants, some of whom he has come to know through a ministry his church has in Wimauma. He said he does not employ undocumented immigrants in his business.

Beckwith would like to see a program in which the immigrants appear before the government with their employers, pay a fine and a fee and pass a background check before getting worker visas and standing in line for citizenship. He thinks the border should also be strongly secured.

“I do not like the fact that the present administration wants to give immigrants citizenship without going through due process,” Beckwith said. “I don’t like executive mandates. “

President Obama in 2014 issued an executive order restricting deportations to those who threaten public safety or national security and allowing certain undocumented immigrants who are parents of American citizens to register their presence in the U.S. and pay taxes.

Beckwith disagreed with much of what has been said by Republican presidential candidates about undocumented immigrants and said he hopes to nudge the party in a different direction, closer to the position Rubio put forth a few years ago when he proposed reform. “I don’t agree that you should send them all home where they came from,” Beckwith said. “That’s not pragmatic. That’s not workable. It’s ridiculous.”

esilvestrini@tampatrib.com

813-259-7837

Twitter: @ElaineTBO