From ambulances bringing in gravely injured patients to constant dealings with insurance providers in a changing health coverage landscape, there are numerous sources of stress in every hospital.

Add Boulder Community Health's impending October mega-migration from its longtime Broadway digs to its Foothills Parkway campus, and things have the potential to get overwhelming for some employees.

Enter the 30-day mindfulness challenge.

The challenge, being led by Denver-based "personal balance" coach Diane Sieg and brought to BCH by chief nursing officer Jackie Attlesey-Pries, asks participants to spend at least five minutes each day performing instructor-taught deep breathing, meditative or movement practices to help themselves live more in the moment, focus on their own well-being and reduce stress.

"It's just about being present in your experience," Sieg, a longtime emergency room nurse, said of mindfulness. "Because when we're busy and chaotic and interrupted and stressed, we're never in the moment."

Come October, BCH will move the emergency, surgery, acute care and other main services now housed at Broadway to its newly expanded and remodeled campus off Foothills Highway and Arapahoe Avenue in east Boulder.

The move is part of a 10-year, $125 million comprehensive plan unveiled in 2010 to create a state-of-the art hospital facility.

Attlesey-Pries, also BCH's vice president of patient care services, said she contacted Sieg this spring after hearing about the mindfulness challenge she debuted at Wheat Ridge's Lutheran Medical Center last fall.

Advertisement

The challenge was launched in Boulder on Aug. 13, and 577 of the hospital's roughly 2,400 employees signed up, according to Sieg.

"We've had a great response," said Attlesey-Pries. "We really felt that if we could help people deal with stress ... we would help people move through this big-time change at the hospital in a more positive way."

Sieg spent two days at BCH teaching 30-minute classes during which she demonstrated five different exercises participants can do in five-minute increments.

She has also created a page on her website, yourmindfulyear.com, especially for BCH participants where they can access guided videos.

Sieg said she has found that the "letting-go meditation" and deep breathing exercises are particularly popular at BCH.

The letting-go exercises involve saying "let" to oneself while inhaling deeply and saying "go" during the exhale. The person should think of something — an event, an argument, even a person — that upsets them and imagine that thing floating farther and farther away with each breath, Sieg said.

Cindy Parsons, a nurse in the hospital's pre-operative and post-operative section, tasked with prepping patients for surgery and helping them recover after, said she has enjoyed the simple meditative exercise taught by Sieg.

"You just kind of go to your own meditative place. I always go to the water," she said. "Sometimes when you're having a stressful day, it's nice knowing I can go away for five minutes and it's not about work. If I'm not stressed, that does float over to other people, and they become less stressed."

Wanda Boyd is an administrative assistant who works for five different BCH nursing directors, including two who are heavily involved in the upcoming move. Boyd, 62, said before the challenge started she already had a note on her computer monitor that read "breathe."

She said she has really felt the benefits of the "let go" exercise.

"I really appreciate the opportunity that the hospital gave us, bringing in this program, because it just reminds you every day to take five minutes and do some deep breaths or close your eyes and let go," she said. "It's helped me a lot."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328 or rubinoj@dailycamera.com.