MCLEAN, Va., Aug. 3, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Cognosante has announced the hiring of Corey Stevenson as Vice President and Deputy General Manager of its Health Data and Communications (HDC) business unit. Corey, who brings more than 15 years' experience at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), will oversee operations, projects, strategy development, and program execution for Cognosante's growing HDC business.



"Corey's track record at CMS speaks for itself, and his passion for promoting quality care makes him an ideal fit for Cognosante's leadership team," said Davis Foster, Executive Vice President and General Manager, HDC, Cognosante. "We believe his expertise will help position Cognosante for even greater growth and success; his dedication to transforming our healthcare system will lead to the development of even more impactful and innovative health IT solutions for our state and federal customers."



At CMS, Corey held successively complex and high-profile roles, achieved efficiencies and cost savings while supporting daily IT operations, and successfully implemented enterprise IT systems for programs including the Medicare Prescription Drug Program, Medicare Contracting Reform, the Health Insurance Marketplace, and other Affordable Care Act Initiatives. He holds a Bachelor of Science and Finance degrees from Morgan State University and a Master of Science in Information Systems and Technology degree from Johns Hopkins University.



"The Cognosante team understands the challenges facing healthcare consumers from both a business and technology perspective," Corey said. "I viewed this opportunity with the company as a chance to drive real change in Health IT."



About Cognosante



Cognosante is a leading provider of consulting, technology, and BPO services to healthcare organizations, specializing in Health Reform initiatives. The company has more than 25 years of experience working with 48 states and the Federal government to assist its clients in developing, managing, and executing complex healthcare information programs and infrastructures. Its expertise includes health insurance marketplaces, enrollment reconciliation, healthcare standards, modular system integration, health informatics, Medicaid, health information exchange, and fraud, waste, and abuse. Please visit www.cognosante.com for more information.

Andrew Gordon Marketing Manager 703-206-6039