A theme likely to dominate the debate, on CNN, is the problem of economic inequality and with it the implicit critique that although Mr. Obama pulled the economy out of the crisis that enveloped it in 2008, the recovery has left the vast majority of Americans behind. That sentiment has manifested itself on the campaign trail in a populist conviction reflected in the major candidates’ positions on topics including trade agreements and Wall Street regulation.

“They may not come out and criticize Obama, but they’ll all be saying, ‘This hasn’t been a good recovery for most people,’ ” said Dean Baker, an economist and a co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research.

Mrs. Clinton reflects the party’s tack to the left on domestic issues.

Last week, she said she could not support Mr. Obama’s signature trade pact, the Trans Pacific Partnership, which she had championed as secretary of state and which Mr. Sanders had come out forcefully against. She has also proposed doing away with the so-called Cadillac tax on certain health care plans, aligning herself with labor unions on dismantling a key part of Mr. Obama’s Affordable Care Act. Mr. Sanders has also taken aim at the law, saying it does not go far enough to make health insurance affordable for many Americans.

Photo

After much criticism from party liberals that the Obama administration did not do enough to punish the Wall Street executives responsible for the financial crisis, Mrs. Clinton on Thursday included in her proposal to regulate Wall Street this clear message: “When people commit crimes on Wall Street, they will be prosecuted and imprisoned.”

That stood out as a break with the White House, which “basically took a pass when it came to prosecuting anyone from the financial crises,” Mr. Baker said.

While the emphasis on economic populism can be attributed partly to the nature of a Democratic primary contest, during which candidates try to woo labor unions and the liberal activist base, polls show that there is a broader frustration among voters about income inequality. Sixty-one percent of Americans said they believed only a few people at the top had a chance to get ahead in today’s economy, and 66 percent said income and wealth in the United States should be more evenly distributed, according to a New York Times/CBS News poll from June.

“The American public is anxious and angry and ready for very deep reform across kitchen table issues,” said Felicia Wong, the president and chief executive of the Roosevelt Institute, a liberal think tank. “And that’s really what’s going on in the electorate right now.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Last week, Mr. Obama hosted a White House summit meeting on how to lift middle-class wages, and at a fund-raiser in Los Angeles on Saturday, he said one of the problems that had not been fully solved during his administration was “the fact that wages and incomes for ordinary Americans are still flat.”

But aides point to his plan on college affordability and his efforts to raise the minimum wage, expand overtime pay, and make child care more affordable and accessible.

“In terms of helping middle-class families meet their biggest budgetary stresses, I think Obama has been there,” said Jared Bernstein, a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and a former economic adviser to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr.

“He hasn’t gone as far in that space as what the candidates are proposing,” Mr. Bernstein added, “but he’s gone part of the way.”

Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, said in a briefing last week that Mr. Obama “understands that it is the responsibility of individual candidates to distinguish themselves.”

“That means distinguishing themselves from their competitors,” Mr. Earnest continued. “And in some cases, that means distinguishing themselves from the current occupant of the office.”

But if the substance of Mr. Obama’s policies will be indirectly debated on Tuesday, so will his style and the criticism that he has not tried hard enough to work with his political opponents.

Without mentioning the president, Mrs. Clinton often promotes her ability to work with congressional Republicans, a theme she is likely to lean on heavily in the Tuesday debate. “We’ve got a pretty dysfunctional mess in Washington,” Mrs. Clinton said at a recent rally in Columbus, Ohio.

First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday - Friday.

“But I worked across the aisle as a senator for eight years,” she added. “I worked with Republicans as secretary of state. I know there is no substitute for working hard every single day to find common ground.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

William A. Galston, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and a former aide to Bill Clinton, said the candidates would face added pressure to explain precisely how they would move past the bipartisan dysfunction that defined the current administration.

“We’ve had two presidents over a period of nearly 16 years who have failed on what was arguably the central promise of both their campaigns,” Mr. Galston said, referring to Mr. Obama and George W. Bush. “To bring a divided country back together.”

Still, Mr. Obama is more broadly popular than Mr. Bush was in the fall of 2007, when the country began to take the measure of those who would succeed him.

That makes too pointed a repudiation of Mr. Obama’s leadership risky for the Democratic candidates. The president, whose approval rating nationally is roughly 47 percent, enjoys loyal support from key constituencies: African-Americans, who make up a central bloc in Mrs. Clinton’s support, and college-educated white liberals, an important group for Mr. Sanders.

On Sunday, Mr. Obama defended his legacy in an interview with CBS News’s “60 Minutes” saying he was “very proud of what we’ve accomplished, and it makes me think I’d love to do some more.” When asked whether he would be elected for a third term if allowed to run, Mr. Obama answered with an unequivocal “yes.”