Samantha Pearl (Photo: Provided)

Samantha Pearl is leaving her job as the executive director of Community HealthCare Connections, but the decision to do so was partly out of her hands.

"Really, the best description is simply that I feel a call on my life to make a transition, and periodically that happens," Pearl said Thursday. "My faith is strong and I feel that calls me to different things at different times in my life."

CHC announced the change in leadership in a news release Wednesday. The organization — which provides health care and other services to underinsured, uninsured or low-income residents in Calhoun County — is expected to announce a new executive director in the next month.

Pearl will work through a transition period with CHC and her replacement.

Looking back on her 10 years with CHC, Pearl said she's proud of several accomplishments.

"Really I think the tipping point in terms of our effectiveness was our merger with the nursing clinic," Pearl said. "Six years ago, we finalized that merger and for the last six years, we've been able to deliver services to people in a very holistic way."

The former Nursing Clinic of Battle Creek merged with the Calhoun Health Plan, becoming CHC in 2009.

CHC Board of Directors President Ruth Clark, who is also executive director of Integrated Health Partners, said the Dentists' Partnership is another hallmark of Pearl's time there.

By working with Bronson Battle Creek, Clark said, CHC was able to get people dental care they needed by getting them to a practice or to a dentist volunteering time at CHC's clinic, rather than going to the emergency department.

"She always was looking at what the community needs were in light of the mission of the organization," Clark said. "I see that in the leadership that she's developed internally with her folks."

Developing a deep bench of employees was one of the reasons the board is looking at internal candidates rather than external replacements, Clark said.

Pearl said there's a culture at CHC that would be best served by promoting from within.

"While we certainly could look external to the organization to find someone who shares our values, it's much more likely we'll find someone who could be effective immediately who already shares our values, who already embraces our culture," Pearl said.

The change in leadership comes as the health care landscape continues to evolve, thanks mostly to the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which has completely changed how many people, formerly without insurance, pay for services.

Changing how people pay for health care changes the nature of the work done by CHC. Clark said it's reduced the number of people seeking clinical services.

Pearl said the organization has adapted to that change by providing ACA information to the community and offering health navigation services to those trying to sign up for insurance plans or enroll in the state's ACA-related Medicaid expansion, Healthy Michigan.

According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 341,183 Michiganders had enrolled in health care plans as of Feb. 22. About 41 percent of those were people who did not have health coverage in 2014.

Pearl said about 8,000 people in Calhoun County signed up for Healthy Michigan coverage.

"CHC was responsible for about 20 percent of those numbers," Pearl said.

It's a lot of work — something Pearl said she doesn't take full credit for — and that could be why Clark said she was disappointed to lose her, but understands it's a personal decision.

"Samantha's a very visionary person," Clark said.

Seeking health care

For access to health services or other assistance, call Community HealthCare Connections at 969-6494, go to www.chcconnections.com or find them at 62 E. Michigan Ave.

Read or Share this story: http://bcene.ws/1C9SrLo