The net impact of the 2016 proposed payment rule for ASCs and hospital outpatient departments would be an increase of 1.1% for ASCs and a decrease of 0.2% for hospitals, according to a CMS fact sheet released Wednesday.

However, CMS doesn't take sequestration into account in its proposed rule, a news release from the Ambulatory Surgery Center Association (ASCA) says. A special provision in the Budget Control Act of 2011 calls for a fixed reduction in Medicare spending of 2% per year and "remains in effect until at least 2024 unless Congress acts," says the release.

"Unfortunately, the proposed rule and continued use of the CPI-U (Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers) to update ASC reimbursements offers more evidence of CMS' unwillingness to recognize that the agency must do more to actively promote ASCs as a high quality, efficient provider of outpatient care for America's seniors," says ASCA CEO Bill Prentice.

The ASC figure of 1.1% is a result of a combination of a 1.7% inflation update and a productivity reduction mandated by the Affordable Care Act of 0.6%.

Meanwhile, the estimated hospital rate of -0.2% is based on the projected hospital market basket increase of 2.7% minus both a 0.6% adjustment for multi-factor productivity, a 0.2% percentage point adjustment "required by law," and a 2% adjustment stemming from a CMS overestimation of packaged laboratory payments related to laboratory tests previously paid under the Clinical Laboratory Fee Schedule. CMS arrives at the -0.2% figure "after considering all other policy changes proposed under the Outpatient Prospective Payment System, including estimated spending for pass-through payments."

Referring to the 2% adjustment, Rick Pollack, incoming president and CEO of the American Hospital Association, says he's "dismayed that miscalculations by (CMS) actuaries are resulting in penalties to hospitals and the patients they care for."

Additionally:

ASCs and hospitals would both be subject to a 2% reduction in annual payments if they fail to meet the requirements of their respective quality reporting programs.

The proposal would also preserve but soften the "two-midnight" rule by emphasizing the role of physician judgment in determining whether inpatient admission of patients who need less than a two-midnight hospital stay would become payable under Medicare Part A. Additionally, CMS proposes to use quality improvement organizations rather than Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) or recovery auditors to conduct first-line reviews of providers who submit claims for inpatient admissions.

CMS will accept comments on the proposed rule until August 31, and will respond to comments in a final rule to be issued on or around November 1. The proposed rule will appear in the July 8 Federal Register.

Jim Burger