Friday is the last day to sign up for insurance under the Affordable Care Act for coverage that starts Feb. 1.

For millions of Americans, open enrollment is the time to go online to re-up or switch insurance plans or to sign up for coverage for the first time to avoid penalties. The third open enrollment period under the federal health care law, or Obamacare, started Nov. 1.

Although Friday is the deadline for people who want to be fully covered by the start of next month, enrollment for coverage starting later in the year will continue through Jan 31.

So far this time around, 8.7 million consumers nationally, including 412,000 Pennsylvanians, have selected plans for 2016 through the federal marketplace website, healthcare.gov, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. About two-thirds of the total are returning customers, and the remainder are signing up for the first time.

"We saw unprecedented demand for Jan. 1st coverage and continue to make steady progress signing up new customers as open enrollment proceeds," Heath and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said in a news release. "We are focused on educating customers about the affordable options at HealthCare.gov and providing them the help they need to make the best coverage choices."

According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, the help line for the federal marketplace has received 10.4 million calls from Nov. 1 to Jan. 9. The average wait time was 10 and a half minutes, though the time was down to a little more than a minute by the first week of January.

Many Lehigh Valley participants are finding they have to pick new insurance plans. That's because one-third of last year's 62 plans, including more than a dozen from Highmark Blue Shield, have ceased to exist as the insurance industry moves toward coverage that shifts costs to consumers in the form of higher deductibles, co-pays and other out-of-pocket expenses.

But even those who don't have to shop around should consider doing so to save money. In the 37 states, including Pennsylvania, where the federal government runs the online insurance marketplace, premiums this year are increasing an average of 7.5 percent for the second-lowest-cost silver plan, according to an HSS analysis. (Plans are rated by quality of coverage as bronze, silver, gold or platinum.)

In the nine insurance regions of Pennsylvania, where last year 473,000 residents received coverage through the federal marketplace, the price of the second-lowest-cost silver plan is rising even more — 11 percent on average, HHS found. For the Lehigh Valley, that translates to an extra $52 monthly expense — though for lower-income enrollees the higher premiums will be offset by corresponding higher subsidies because the Internal Revenue Service uses the second lowest-cost silver plan as its benchmark to calculate tax credits.

Before passage of President Barack Obama's health-care reform law, many people who bought insurance plans in the individual market had limited options because plans could deny coverage or charge higher rates for pre-existing conditions. Now, eight in 10 current enrollees qualify for financial help and most can get coverage for $75 a month or less after tax credits, according to HHS.

Meanwhile, people who are eligible for financial assistance but still don't get insurance face increasing penalties. Some of those without it in 2014 were forced to forfeit $95 — or 1 percent of their income, depending on which was higher — from tax refunds filed in the spring.

The cost will go up to $325, or 2 percent of income, for the 2015 tax year, and to $695, or 2.5 percent of income, for the 2016 tax year. (Deductions for uninsured children, which are half those of adults, can result in even larger penalties for families.)

The Kaiser Family Foundation has predicted the average penalty for not having insurance in 2016 will be $969 per household.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130

AFFORDABLE CARE ACT ENROLLMENT DEADLINES

• Friday is the last day to sign up for coverage that starts Feb. 1.

• Those who sign up by Jan. 31 will be enrolled March 1.