The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) has put a Kurdish region of Syria under fire and into a state of fear, forcing nearly 60,000 people to flee to Turkey. In fear of the Islamic terrorists, over a period of 24 hours, Syrian Kurds abandoned their homes to cross the border. Turkey had opened a part of the border to allow the Kurdish civilians safe passage as ISIS captured villages near the border.

Much of the mass exodus from the border villages stemmed from a fear that ISIS would attack the border town of Ayn al-Arab after the terrorist group had moved within nine miles of the town. This follows a three-day period where nearly 60 villages in the region fell to ISIS control. Fearing a massacre in Ayn al-Arab, people fled for safety.

With a target painted on ISIS, the United States has indicated that they are ready to launch air strikes in Syria to stop, or at least slow, the advance of ISIS. At the request of the Iraqi government, U.S. airstrikes have already hit the terrorist group in that country, however, it is unclear to what extent the military action will be in Syria. The Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, is not a legitimate president according to Washington. So a request from al-Assad to the U.S. military may not draw in the same response as the requests from Iraq did.

As the fearful Kurdish Syrian refugees flee from ISIS over the border into Turkey, Turkish soldiers just watched, keeping an eye out for potential Islamic terror threats. With few belongings grabbed before fleeing their villages, many are still waiting to cross the border. According to Turkish officials, thousands more were waiting to escape the oncoming ISIS threat and cross into Turkey, who opened their border to the refugees on Friday.

Some who fled called upon Turkey, Russia and the U.S. for help, saying that ISIS has nothing to do with Islam. Some men with the refugees wanted to stay and fight the Islamic terrorists to defend their homes, however, many were tasked to help the women and children escape to Turkey.

Since the ISIS onslaught began on Tuesday, nearly 100 Syrian villages were evacuated by Kurdish forces. Rami Abdulrahman of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights stated that ISIS looks at Ayn al-Arab as something that is in their way and want to wipe it out to move on. According to the Observatory, ISIS seized villages near Ayn al-Arab and have executed 11 civilians.

According to Abdulrahman, near 300 Kurdish fighters had moved into Syria on Friday to assist pushing ISIS back. ISIS appears to want to eliminate anything having to do with the Kurdish, turning the region into a real-life nightmare. It is unclear what effect the Kurdish fighters will have against ISIS or if they were Iraqi Kurds or Syrian Kurds.

Reports have surfaced from the Observatory that Syrian Kurds clashed with ISIS fighters overnight and at least 18 of the Islamic Terrorists were killed. And while it is a start, it seems to be doing little to slow the advance of ISIS.

The PYD, the main Syrian Kurdish political party has made 50,000 fighters, part of the armed wing of the party called the YPG, available to partner with the proposed United States coalition. However, they may not be welcome to fight the ISIS terrorists due to the party’s connection to the Kurdistan Workers Party, a group recognized as another terrorist group by many Western nations after a campaign by militants for Kurdish rights in Turkey.

However, the United States may add the PYD fighters if they are truly intent on hunting down and ending ISIS. After the brutal killings of both American and English citizens, it could end up being a choice of which is the less of two evils. However, it is clear to the Kurdish that have been forced out of their Syrian homes to flee the fear touting ISIS terrorists, that nothing has slowed down the group yet.

By Carl Auer

Sources:

CBC News

Reuters

CNN

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr