There aren’t too many days that go by without Rob Johnson being reminded of “The Play.”

After all, the acrobatic tip-in by Josh Adams at the buzzer that lifted Chaparral to the 2012 Class 5A state championship over Arapahoe is one of the indelible moments in Colorado prep basketball history.

But there is another image that sticks out for Johnson, the former Chaparral coach. It’s a snapshot that illustrates how Adams, now a senior guard at Wyoming, has used the perpetual chip on his shoulder to transform himself into a monster on the basketball court.

Two weeks before that state title game, Chaparral hosted Dakota Ridge in the second round. With a talented, senior-laden roster, it was supposed to be a brief pit stop on the way to a state title. But with 2½ minutes to go, Adams and the Wolverines were down by 10 points, and their dream of a state title was about to end before the run truly started.

“We call a timeout, and as soon as we sit down, Josh takes over the huddle,” Johnson recalled. “I didn’t say one word. Josh looked every kid in the eye, and when he looked them in the eye, they knew he meant what he was saying, that there was no way we were going to go out like this. And that we were going to dominate those last 2½ minutes.”

The inspired Wolverines stormed out of the huddle on fire, and one minute later the score was tied. They won on a last-second shot to begin a dream run that ended with Adams’ memorable play in the championship game.

Four years later, Adams is again trying to grab a team by the collar and drag it up to his level, one that spews competitiveness and an edge few prep players coming out of Colorado have matched.

Adams entered Friday averaging 25.7 points per game, good for fourth-best in the country. Along the way he has helped a Wyoming team depleted by the mass exodus of seniors from last season’s NCAA Tournament team to an 8-8 record.

At 6-foot-2, with eye-popping leaping ability and athletic burst, Adams no doubt has been bestowed his fair share of physical gifts. But it’s his relentless, us-against-the-world mentality that has made him a fan favorite in Laramie.

“I think it’s part of my family’s DNA,” Adams said. “We’re all very fiery. That’s where I get my competitive edge, and I think I’m probably one of the more competitive and more fiery people in my family. I’ve never really been talked about or very highly recruited. People have always said, ‘He can do this, but he can’t do that.’ So I’ve always had that chip on my shoulder. And no challenge is too big for me.”

What has impressed Johnson most is the way Adams has learned to channel the inferno that burns inside him. As a freshman at Chaparral, Johnson remembers seeing Adams on the bench after making a mistake. His hands would shake. His face would be flushed red with anger.

“You couldn’t console him,” Johnson said. “You felt like if you put him back in there, he would have swallowed someone whole. That’s how fierce he was.”

That edge remains for Adams, but he has grown. Heading into this season, he devoured books on leadership and had long talks with Wyoming coach Larry Shyatt about how to press the right buttons to get the most out of teammates.

It’s a role Adams has relished with typical zeal.

“I’ve learned a lot,” Adams said. “You learn how to say things, when to say things, when guys like to be approached. … It’s about coming together and building trust.”

Nick Kosmider: nkosmider@denverpost.com or @NickKosmider