Used cars from Boulder, Larimer and Weld counties merit scrutiny

Cars sit abandoned on 28th Street just north of Pearl Street early on the morning of Sept 12. ( SSG PHOTO )

Boulder County officials said they had yet to receive complaints about flood-damaged vehicles on the local used car market, as of Friday. But that doesn't mean consumers shouldn't be on high alert when shopping for their next ride.

According to industry sources, Colorado was among several states that became landing spots for water damaged cars from the East Coast following Superstorm Sandy and even from areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

Then, Colorado had its own historic storm.

The Colorado Department of Revenue issues "salvage titles" for totaled cars six years old or newer, but those titles do not specify how the car was totaled. While Carfax and other vehicle history reports can be helpful, they are not always up to date and dishonest sellers can cover up external signs of water damage, passing off cars with serious internal problems as lightly used.

"Carfax is only as good as the information that is input through it," said Tim Jackson, president of the Colorado Automobile Dealers Association.

Jackson, who in November posted an entry on his blog about how to spot water damaged cars from the East Coast, said he has heard several estimates of how many cars were damaged during last month's flooding, but noted insurance companies are still assessing many of them.

For shoppers on the used car market he recommended being extremely careful, especially if a car is coming from Boulder, Larimer or Weld Counties. He said keep an eye out for telltale signs like water lines or stains inside the car, or mud or dirt under the hood or the wheel wells. He said musty odors inside the car are another giveaway, and even wet or recently shampooed carpets might be hints that water damage is being concealed.

Jackson said in recent meetings with dealers across the Front Range he is hearing growing support for legislation next year that would create a new salvage title designation specifically for flood and water damage.

"We believe the states should identify those as flood damaged cars and that would protect consumers. It would protect dealers. It would protect the system," he said. "And it would create a tool to prevent conceptual fraud on behalf of someone who is trying to pass off a flood-damaged car as one that has never had any trouble."

Deputy District Attorney Jane Walsh is the director of Boulder County Community Protection Division. The division has been fielding complaints nonstop since the flooding ended, but most have focused on residences and disputes with contractors, she said, though she would not be surprised to hear of people trying to resell flood-damaged cars.

She said consumers should start with a dealer with a good reputation and be especially careful with a vehicle that seems too far below market value.

With Colorado's salvage title law only pertaining too cars six years old or newer, Walsh said consumers should beware of older cars.

"I think sadly, yet again it's going to be people who are on the lower end of the market that will be a the most at risk," she said.

Phillip Higdon, co-owner of Boulder Auto Inc., last week estimated that his shop had serviced a dozen cars with flood damage, nine of which were deemed totaled by insurance companies.

On Friday, Boulder Auto's technicians worked on a 2007 Hyundai Elantra in which floodwaters had shorted out the computers that control its airbags, body control module and other systems. The seats and many dashboard components had to be removed so repairs could be made, Higdon said.

Even once obvious damage is repaired, internal issues can linger, Higdon said. He said cars that have important parts of the their transmissions submerged in water may experience problems with those parts months or years later.

He main advice is "buyer beware."

"Get as much information on the car's life as you can," Higdon said. "The more vague someone is, usually that's a yellow caution flag."

Bart Caddell is the general manager of Boulder used car dealership, Blue Spruce Auto Sales. The dealership is owned by Super Rupair, the country's largest independent Subaru Service Center.

Caddekk said he attends insurance auto auctions on a weekly basis and has yet to see a flood-damaged car for sale there, meaning they may not hit the market for a while yet.

Colleen Jayne was at Blue Spruce on Saturday filling out paperwork to buy a 2010 Subaru Legacy. She and her husband, George, live in Fourmile Canyon, where her previous car was totaled during the flood.

The couple said they have been weary of any car that might have been submerged in water, though they were more concerned about cars from the East Coast than from within Colorado during their search.

Colleen Jayne said she drove a used car from anther lot but did not like the way it ran and noticed it was from Florida, which is why she passed on it.

"We don't want flood-damaged cars," George Jayne said. "We checked the Carfax to make sure this one didn't come from New Jersey."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328, rubinoj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/JoeCarmenRubino.