Patty Sellers stood patiently at the Walgreens counter in Scottsdale as her purchases were rung up and packaged. She then leaned in toward pharmacy manager Tim Logan and asked softly, “Does licorice cause high blood pressure?”

Smiling, Logan turned to his computer. After about a minute, he told her it could, if someone consumes 30 grams or more a day for several weeks.

“Good,” the Paradise Valley resident said with a sigh. “I don’t eat that much.”

The brief exchange between Sellers and Logan has become an increasingly common scenario. Today’s pharmacists are taking a more hands-on approach to patient care by going back in time to when interactions were more personal, not just another sale at the cash register. And consumers are making a visit to the pharmacist their first-line defense for health care.

The trend is timely. Some pharmacists are anticipating an increase in customer questions, as people who navigate the Affordable Care Act look for convenience and cost savings to manage their health.

Even Marigene Starr, a retired nurse in Phoenix, relies on her local pharmacist, Teresa Stickler, to help her stay well. “I’ve had questions about whether different medications will work well with each other or which supplements are OK. Over time, I’ve needed to change my drugs for one reason or another and they are really super-helpful.”

Teresa Stickler, who owns Melrose Pharmacy in central Phoenix, also enjoys educating people about their medicines and symptoms.

She says most of her customers are between 40 and 60 years old; some tell her it’s less embarrassing to ask a pharmacist about low testosterone, for example, than it is to ask a doctor.

Along with routine questions about side effects for prescribed medicines, Stickler says customers often have very specific concerns. “Can niacine cause flushing?” Yes. “What can I do to improve my sex drive?” Prescribed hormones may help. “Can I eat grapefruit with my medicine?” Grapefruit interacts with so many medicines that she advises against it.

Another local pharmacist, Rosy Vallin, who runs Rosy’s Pharmacy in north Phoenix, grew up in a small town in Texas and wanted to be a doctor. But when she volunteered at the local pharmacy, she watched in awe as the pharmacist dealt with customers.

“I saw how everything worked and how he knew every single person in town.”

“He interacted with customers. They had known each other for a long time. They’d say, ‘I trust you more than I trust my doctor.’ I wanted that. I wanted to help guide them through their medications.”

Kelly Ridgway, chief executive officer of the Arizona Pharmacy Association, says people are going to pharmacists more often today for vaccinations and help figuring out medications. The ease of getting a flu shot at the local drugstore encouraged some people to get other vaccines, like immunizations against shingles and pertussis, taken care of there as well, she says.

But pharmacists, who complete years of training and study to obtain a doctor of pharmacy degree, can do much more than give shots and advice. Some are entering into collaborative agreements with doctors to help consumers manage such chronic conditions as diabetes and high cholesterol. They also are allowed to check a customer’s blood pressure and cholesterol and conduct other preventive health screenings. Medicare and most insurers won’t reimburse them for those procedures, but Ridgway says the industry is working to change that.

Like Vallin, Richard Herrier, a professor at the University of Arizona College of Pharmacy in Tucson, remembers a time when the pharmacy was the first stop for a community’s medical needs. As a teenager in a small California town during the 1960s, “We never went straight to a doctor,” Herrier says. “We went straight to the pharmacist. He triaged things and if it was something complicated, then he’d suggest going to see one of the docs.”

But more often than not, Herrier says, customers were able to get their basic medical questions answered right in the drugstore.

“It’s what pharmacists used to do all the time, but the profession kind of got away from that,” Herrier said.

They went from spending much of their time at the front counter where they could easily engage customers to being several feet away where they’d concentrate on sorting pills into bottles.

To help reinforce the transition, several businesses, such as Safeway and Walgreen Co., are revamping their pharmacies, creating lower counter fronts and casting them in cheerful colors.

Some of the remodeling adds space for private consultations between pharmacist and customer.

“It’s not that we want to be independent physicians,” Herrier says. But pharmacy is heading toward the clinical practice of medicine.

“Money makes the world go round and now the profession is working hard to get Medicare-provider status. Don’t be surprised someday at a (walk-in medical) Minute Clinic to see a nurse practitioner working with a pharmacist.”