Republican Kevin Lundberg, who chairs the Senate Health Committee in Colorado, believes intrauterine devices (IUDs) are an abortifacient — drugs that cause an abortion — not contraception. It’s hardly a new criticism (you remember Hobby Lobby?), but Lundberg is speaking out now that the Colorado Family Planning Initiative (CFPI) is trying to get more money from the state.

Free IUDs for low-income women are one of the family planning and preventive health services CFPI provides; more than 30,000 Colorado women have received the device, saving them between $500 and several thousands of dollars, NPR reported. Last year, Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper said the initiative not only saved the state millions of dollars between 2009 and 2013, but the teen birth rate dropped by 40 percent. Yet it is how IUDs work to prevent pregnancy that makes it more controversial than birth control pills.

First, a refresher: the two types of IUDs available in the U.S. are hormonal and copper; The Atlantic reported “copper is toxic to sperm and kills it before it gets to the egg.” It’s estimated about one woman out of 100 will get pregnant once a health care provider has implanted the T-shaped device into her uterus. If, however, a woman is implanted with an IUD up to five days after having unprotected sex, the copper IUD double as emergency contraception.

“And when used in that way, the copper-laden environment might also prevent the fertilized egg from implanting in the uterus. It might,” The Atlantic added. “We just don’t know.”

According to The Washington Post, the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA) description of the drug never mentions the term abortifacient, just that “many prevent a woman from releasing eggs; many prevent sperm from reaching or fertilizing the egg; and a few interfere with a fertilized egg attaching, or implanting, in the uterus, which is essential for a viable pregnancy.” Those few refer to copper IUDs.

On the opposite side of Lundberg’s argument, including Republican State Rep. Dan Coram (who NPR said is sponsoring CFPI’s bill), some people are convinced pregnancy only exists one a fertilized egg is implanted in the uterus. Dr. Barbara Levy, vice president for health policy for the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, told The Post anything before doesn’t count.

Dr. Stephanie Teal, who specializes in obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Colorado Hospital, said something similar to MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow on her show. After Maddow presented Teal with the idea IUDs function as an “ongoing abortion clinic” in a woman’s body, Teal said “that’s just not true.”

She added every so often, a patient will go to her with concerns an IUD is an abortifacient, in which case Teal says she’s happy for the opportunity to discuss further how exactly the device works and how it will affect her patient’s body.