SYRACUSE, N.Y. , Sept. 29, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- A new Aspen Dental office is opening in Sebring, FL on Thursday, October 2 . Located at 1855 US 27 North, the conveniently located practice will provide dental services that range from dentures and preventive care to general dentistry and restoration.

Dr. Maria Brachowitz, lead dentist at the Sebring office, received her Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS) degree at Columbia University . Dr. Brachowitz looks forward to meeting the Sebring community and providing much needed access to high-quality dental care and education.

To make an appointment, patients can call (863) 612-1060 or 800- ASPEN DENTAL (800-277-3633), or visit www.aspendental.com.

The Sebring practice, located in Highlands County , is one of 43 Aspen Dental-branded locations in Florida , a state where 57 of the 67 counties (including Highlands County ) have dental health professional shortage areas as designated by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services .

According to a study conducted in 2013 by Syracuse University's Whitman School of Management , each new Aspen Dental-branded office supports local community growth by contributing more than $1.3 million in positive economic impact through job creation and capital investment. The local community benefits through investment in office construction, furniture and fixtures, jobs created and wages and benefits paid, taxes, and investment in marketing and advertising.

In addition to offering patients the choice of seven styles of Aspen Dental's exclusive ComfiDents® brand full and partial dentures, Aspen Dental will provide comprehensive exams, hygiene services, treatment of periodontal (gum) disease, extractions, fillings, oral surgery, whitening, and crown and bridge work. The office features digital radiography and offers advanced screening for oral cancer.

At this new Aspen Dental-branded practice, Dr. Brachowitz and staff provide:

Personalized treatment and friendly service. Quick-fix solutions don't solve larger or chronic oral health problems. That's why the caring dentists at Aspen Dental take a comprehensive approach to dental care. Following the initial exam and X-rays, each patient receives a customized treatment plan designed by the dentist with long-term oral and overall health in mind.

Quick-fix solutions don't solve larger or chronic oral health problems. That's why the caring dentists at Aspen Dental take a comprehensive approach to dental care. Following the initial exam and X-rays, each patient receives a customized treatment plan designed by the dentist with long-term oral and overall health in mind. Affordable care and flexible payment options. Cost shouldn't prevent patients from getting the dental care they deserve. That's why Aspen Dental offers special promotions, senior discounts, and free new-patient exams and X-rays for patients without dental insurance. The practice works with all insurance providers and handles the paperwork, saving patients time and hassle.

Cost shouldn't prevent patients from getting the dental care they deserve. That's why Aspen Dental offers special promotions, senior discounts, and free new-patient exams and X-rays for patients without dental insurance. The practice works with all insurance providers and handles the paperwork, saving patients time and hassle. Customization and a Money-Back Guarantee for denture patients . When patients choose Aspen Dental for any of the seven styles of ComfiDents ® full and partial dentures, they have the peace of mind of knowing that the supportive dentists and staff will go above and beyond to ensure proper fit and comfort of their custom-crafted dentures. As an added convenience, Aspen Dental has its own on-site denture laboratory</a>, which helps facilitate quick turnaround for denture repairs, relines or adjustments. Getting used to dentures takes some time, but if patients are dissatisfied with their dentures for any reason – Aspen Dental will refund the cost of the dentures when patients return them within 90 days.

. When patients choose Aspen Dental for any of the seven styles of ComfiDents full and partial dentures, they have the peace of mind of knowing that the supportive dentists and staff will go above and beyond to ensure proper fit and comfort of their custom-crafted dentures. As an added convenience, Aspen Dental has its own on-site denture laboratory</a>, which helps facilitate quick turnaround for denture repairs, relines or adjustments. Getting used to dentures takes some time, but if patients are dissatisfied with their dentures for any reason – Aspen Dental will refund the cost of the dentures when patients return them within 90 days. Convenient hours and location. The office will be open extended hours, including evenings and select Saturdays, so that patients can see the dentist at a time that works best for their schedule. Walk-in and emergency patients are welcome.

About Aspen Dental

Aspen Dental is one of the largest and fastest-growing networks of independent dental care providers in the U.S. with more than 450 practices in communities across 28 states. As part of its mission to provide America with a healthy mouth, Aspen Dental is providing millions of Americans with access to quality, affordable dental care. Every Aspen Dental-branded practice offers a full range of dental and denture services – including comprehensive exams, cleanings, extractions, fillings, periodontal treatment, whitening, oral surgery, crown and bridge work.

In 2013, Aspen Dental-branded practices recorded nearly 2.9 million patient visits and welcomed more than 600,000 new patients. The dentists and staff at Aspen Dental-branded practices have a deep commitment to patient satisfaction, and every Aspen Dental location is accredited by the Better Business Bureau .

Aspen Dental practices are supported by Aspen Dental Management, Inc. , a dental support organization that provides non-clinical business support to licensed, independent dentists.

To learn more about Aspen Dental practices and services, preview the Aspen Dental patient experience, get answers to general treatment questions, find a location, and schedule appointments, visit www.aspendental.com. To learn more about careers at Aspen Dental, visit http://aspendentaljobs.com.

SOURCE Aspen Dental