The day of her high-risk operation, Alissa Brown woke up with a sense of nervous excitement. Despite the potential dangers, which she was well aware of, she had wept with joy about the possible cure in store. Still, that morning, she was feeling a bit jittery.

Six hours later, the 23-year-old would be in the ER at Kaiser Permanente in San Diego, going through endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy (ETS) surgery, in which surgeons would collapse both of her lungs to destroy a portion of nerves located in her chest. ETS surgery is usually considered a last resort, as it comes with significant risks. Side effects and complications range from extreme hypotension, heat intolerance, arrhythmia and, in extreme cases, death.

Yet for Alissa, the promise far outweighed the risk. Since she could remember, Alissa has struggled with a condition that she believes has driven her in and out of psychiatric care with anxiety and depression: excessive sweating.

“In laymen’s terms, our internal thermostat is incorrectly set, telling the body that it’s overheated. So when most people in a given room are comfortable, somebody with hyperhidrosis [may feel] that they’re overheated, and that’s a mechanism for the body to cool, to sweat,” said Dr Brian Perri, an orthopedic spine surgeon at Cedars-Sinai. “It is uncontrollable by the patient, so at any given moment, when you least want to have those symptoms, it comes on because patients are concerned or wary of that, and that little bit of anxiety can stimulate the body to sweat.”

A few months ago, Alissa and her boyfriend Diego left her house and headed for the hospital.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Less than 20% of hyperhidrosis sufferers seek medical treatment.

“My hands started sweating for the first time all day in the car,” reflected Alissa. “We were listening to this really beautiful music at the same time, and I closed my eyes and started crying, realizing I was on my way to something that I had been dreaming of for so very long. I just kind of looked down at my hands and squeezed them and saw the sweat glisten, and hoped that’d be the very last time I’d see something so familiar to me.”

About 7.8 million Americans suffer from the condition. Despite the vast numbers, according to Dr Michael Kaminer of SkinCare Physicians, less than 20% of hyperhidrosis sufferers seek medical treatment.

“A lot of people just don’t do the surgery … because it’s so risky,” laughed Alissa. “But it’s funny because it didn’t matter in my head. I knew about all the risks, the side-effects, [and] the horror stories … It was just coming to this point in my life where I felt it was all or nothing.”

When Alissa emerged out of the operating room, she was completely disoriented. She couldn’t even remember why she was there. That night, Alissa had to prop herself up with pillows because of how sore, stiff and uncomfortable she was. She had four incisions on her body, two on each size, measuring at about three-quarters of an inch each.

“My boyfriend kept telling me to try lotion because typically as soon as I use lotion on my hands they start getting slimy and drippy. I just tried a little bit and waited for my hands to sweat and nothing! Not a single gland was sweating. I truly think I’m cured,” laughed Alissa.

Though Alissa’s hands no longer sweat excessively, she now suffers from compensatory sweating, an unavoidable side-effect, which can run from mild to severe sweating on the abdomen, back, butt, face, feet and/or thighs.

“It’s not that bad. It doesn’t happen all the time. It’s kind of random,” said Alissa. “[But] it’s really weird. I [can] actually feel sweat dripping down my back … It’s obviously still gross and doesn’t feel good, but it’s way better than my hands sweating.”

Two weeks after her surgery, I met Alissa at a restaurant in San Diego. She wore a navy dress, and her red hair and red lipstick complemented her radiant smile. Her eyes met mine with confidence as she introduced herself, sticking out her hand to give me a firm handshake; I would have never expected this person to be the same person she described her old self to be.

The first time Alissa heard about hyperhidrosis, she told me after ordering, was on the radio when she was eight years old.

“It was kind of weird hearing about that because my whole childhood, dealing with doctors, I never brought it up,” she said. “My parents didn’t know it was a thing. My siblings didn’t have it. It was just me dealing with this on my own.”

Embarrassment and lack of understanding keeps many sufferers from seeking advice. So, like many others, Alissa struggled with it in silence. In fact, it was Alissa who diagnosed herself with hyperhidrosis before bringing it up with a doctor.

At 15, during her first job as a math tutor, a fifth-grader humiliated Alissa in front of her friends.

“[He] had autism and that was the worst combination for me with hyperhidrosis,” sighed Alissa. “I was helping him with his homework and he was getting frustrated … He saw my hands were wet or sweating and he was like, ‘Ew! What’s wrong with your hands? They’re so wet!’”

After the incident, Alissa excused herself from the classroom and went straight to her friend’s house, where she broke down and cried. When Alissa was about 12 years old, she brought up the idea of surgery to her father. “I was just so excited,” smiled Alissa. “I thought I could actually get this and it could change my life … but I didn’t really push too hard for it with my dad. I tried to, but he didn’t really encourage the idea. I think he was more wary about [it and the risks] … He couldn’t understand just how much, the impact it had on me. I always had this anchor weighing me down, making me feel like I was a gross, disgusting person unable to touch anyone.”

One thing Alissa absolutely doesn’t miss are the hand towels she used to carry around with her. “[They] felt like a security blanket. Having one of those just to hold,” said Alissa. “I haven’t touched one since my surgery. Like seeing these things lying around, and knowing I don’t need them any more. It’s pretty surreal.”

Everyone around her has seen a positive change in her. “Before the surgery she seemed generally happy with her life, but seeing her get frustrated over the sweat was sad sometimes,” said Alissa’s boyfriend Diego. “Having trouble typing and driving and constantly having to keep towels around would drive me insane, but she was pretty good at handling it.”

Drawing was something Alissa felt a huge connection to when she was younger. However, growing up, she didn’t devote much time to drawing because of the hassle that came with it.

“Even when I would draw, my drawings would always be compromised by my sweat destroying the paper, or smearing the pencil or ink marks,” said Alissa. I have made a few drawings that I’ve been really proud of, but in order to accomplish those I had to use towels under my hands to keep the sweat away from my paper.”

Ever since Alissa has recovered from her surgery, she has started to doodle more.

“I hope to find the time and motivation to sit down with a large canvas and draw something beautiful for my mom,” said Alissa. “She’s the one who I have gained all my creativity from, and she inspires me to try to utilize that as much as possible in life.”