Boulder's Zayo Group is stepping in to take a shot at saving it

Patton Lochridge, left, and Sean Glynn of the Zayo Group holding a meeting on wireless infrastructure at the company's Boulder offices on Wednesday. Lochridge is an account executive with the company and Glynn a sales director. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

The announcement came out early on July 17. One of Boulder's entrepreneurial bright stars, the Zayo Group (NYSE: ZAYO), had signed an agreement to help operate and provide technical support to a controversial, federally funded broadband network charged with bringing high-speed access to Coloado's rural schools, hospitals and libraries.

Gov. John Hickenlooper, in that same announcement, heralded the deal, saying the fast-growing Zayo, which had raised hundreds of millions in its first public offering just months earlier, would have the capital and expertise needed to help EAGLE-Net Alliance complete its network and bring service thousands of Coloradans who still live far on the other side of the digital divide.

What no one addressed that day was a lawsuit, filed against EAGLE-Net just two days earlier, by the company Zayo was preparing to replace.

The suit alleges that EAGLE-Net failed to pay its former operator, Austin, Texas-based Affiniti Inc., and that it had also failed to inform Affiniti of several problems with EAGLE-Net's operations prior to Affiniti's own takeover of the network just 18 months earlier.

Affiniti officials confirmed they were no longer operating the network but declined to comment on the lawsuit, or why the company had exited the deal.

It's unclear whether the lawsuit will affect Zayo's agreement with EAGLE-Net. Zayo and EAGLE-Net officials declined to comment on the suit.

Advertisement

In some ways the Zayo announcement was deja vu. Affiniti came to Colorado in 2013 to assume EAGLE-Net's operations. EAGLE-Net's $100.6 million grant from the federal government had been suspended. The National Telecommunications Information Administration (NTIA), which oversees the grant program, had launched an audit of EAGLE-Net, and found compliance problems and issues with reporting and documentation. But despite those issues, and with the help of Affiniti, it was allowed it to resume building its network.

At the time, EAGLE-Net had spent about $96 million of its grant, but had built only about half of its network.

In 2010, when the federal government said it would provide the bailout money to expand high-speed Internet access in Colorado, state officials were thrilled.

Though much of the Front Range had access to high-speed service, parts of the Eastern Plains and the Western Slope remain locked out. State officials wanted that to change and the grant seemed the ticket the state needed to get the job done.

"Colorado doesn't have large amounts of money to throw out and say hey, go build some broadband," said Brian Shepherd, broadband program manager for the Governor's Office of Information Technology. "Instead, we have to work with existing partners."

Over the next five years, EAGLE-Net stumbled repeatedly, spending vast sums of cash, changing plans and pushing back its deadlines for finishing the project, which was initially supposed to be done at the end of 2013.

Shepherd said his office was unaware of the latest problems between Affiniti and EAGLE-Net. "The NTIA has managed the whole process" Shepherd said. "The governor's intent was simply to support the broadband initiative."

When Affiniti stepped forward in the fall of 2013, it agreed to infuse EAGLE-Net with $8 million to help finish construction. Affiniti also signed a 25-year operating agreement, according to documents obtained from the NTIA.

Then-Republican U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner and State Rep. Angela Williams, D-Denver, were watching closely. They had been sharply critical of EAGLE-Net and were deeply concerned that the program, was still not serving rural and under-served parts of the state.

Williams said her hope had been that whoever took over EAGLE-Net's operations (Affiniti hadn't been publicly identified at the time) would come in and stabilize the critical broadband initiative. She said she was unaware of the problems that quickly cropped up.

Rural phone and broadband providers had also been worried, in part because they believed the federal government had given EAGLE-Net a huge competitive advantage, and because the federal effort appeared to be building in areas they were also trying to serve.

Pete Kirchhof is president of the Colorado Telecommunications Association, which represents 26 rural phone and Internet service providers.

At the time, Kirchhof said, "We complained loudly. Some of our members got loans to upgrade their networks. EAGLE-Net got a grant. It was free money provided by the federal government."

In the ensuing months, the controversy died down. Until two weeks ago.

'We were surprised when the Zayo announcement came out," Kirchhof said. "Our hope going forward is that we will have a good partnership with Zayo. We're cautiously optimistic."

Zayo's Brent Fontana, director of strategic alliances, and Scott Reardon, treasurer, said they believe their company will bring the financial and technical muscle that is needed to finish the network and to ensure rural schools, libraries and hospitals have high-speed Internet access. Neither executive would comment on the dispute between EAGLE-Net and Affiniti.

"Clearly, they've been under a lot of scrutiny," Reardon said. "But a lot of that criticism was largely around the amount of money spent and what came out of it."

Zayo has a successful track record with the NTIA , they said. The company helped build networks in Indiana and Minnesota under the NTIA grant program. "Our projects were done on time and under budget," Fontana said. "The NTIA likes that."

For its part, the NTIA isn't saying much about its notorious grantee. "As part of our oversight of our broadband grants, NTIA will continue to monitor Eagle-Net's progress in reaching the goals of this project to ensure taxpayer funds are being spent wisely," the agency said in a statement.

What EAGLE-Net's future with Zayo will look like isn't clear. EAGLE-Net, evicted by Affiniti from the offices the two shared in Broomfield's Interlocken Business Park, employs just three people, down from 26 earlier this year.

With Zayo's help it must complete the network by Sept. 30, when the BTOP grant program is set to end. EAGLE-Net President Mike Ryan said it had enough money left — $740,000 as of mid-June — to finish the last two of the 29 school districts it promised to connect back in 2013.

Ryan declined to discuss Affiniti or the lawsuit. After Sept. 30, EAGLE-Net's structure "will change significantly," Ryan said. "We will have a board of directors, but it's meant to be run very minimally."

State planners and lawmakers said they will continue to monitor the situation.

Sen. Gardner, in a statement, continued to lambast the EAGLE-Net initiative. "As ENA works to rectify its abysmal track record, it's my hope that ENA uses taxpayer dollars in a way that serves its mission. Colorado and the nation's taxpayers deserve nothing less."

Looking ahead, Williams said, "We want to ensure that the people of Colorado are protected, and if this new company is going to help with sustainability, we need to make sure it has the financial means to do this. Let's make sure the network is sustainable."

Jerd Smith: 303-473-1332, smithj@dailycamera.com