"One of the common failings among honorable people is a failure to appreciate how thoroughly dishonorable some other people can be, and how dangerous it is to trust them." - Thomas Sowell

Occasionally, I get asked, "Just who are these America haters you're always whining about? Hate's such a strong word! Surely you don't think Democrats actually hate this country, do you?"

The short answer is, no, not Democrats per se. Most Democrats I know love this country as much as we do. The America haters I refer to are the Alinskyites we've written about. America's freedom and prosperity symbolizes everything these anarchists hate. They're the socialists and Marxists who have hijacked the Democrat party, and are using it as a vehicle to destroy America from within.

They view successful Americans as smug, arrogant people whose very existence is an affront to people who toil under tyrants controlling the socialist governments that these haters promote. The problem with these America haters is that they are immoral. They have no integrity. They'll do whatever it takes to accomplish the mission of America's destruction. They've infiltrated our government right up to the White House.

If you hate America and have no principles, you can do pretty much anything you can get away with, because you're unencumbered by ethics and morality. Nothing is off the table for you as you pave the way for your American-hating colleagues to waltz into the halls of power and turn America into a socialist paradise. If you're an America hater who happens to be president, your options are limitless.

As president, you're in a great position to undermine the things that make America great. You can undermine our military defense by drawing it down. You can undermine us financially by devaluing the dollar and creating huge financial boondoggles like Obamacare. You can undermine our borders by allowing illegal aliens to have unencumbered access to the United States and offer them back-door citizenship. You can undermine our schools and social service agencies by flooding them with the children of these illegal aliens. You can undermine the political process by obstructing it through partisanship. You can undermine the Second Amendment by blaming the firearm and not the criminal using it. You can undermine free speech and religious liberty through the Alinsky tactics of shouting down the opposition by using terminology like "homophobe" and "racist."

That last tactic works particularly well. In a politically correct society, nobody wants to be called a racist, so you make everything about race. Have your attorney general call Americans who elected the nation's first black president "cowards on race." Cater to race hustlers like Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson. Sensationalize police shootings of black criminals and ignore the thousands of black-on-black murders across the country. Push the perception that opposition to the president's policies is inherently racist, thus automatically putting the opposition on the defensive.

These people are unprincipled and ruthless. Unfortunately, they're also very effective at what they do. Does the president hate America? Hate's a strong word. You'll have to decide that for yourself. He certainly does want to fundamentally transform it.

CHRISTIANS AGAINST JEWS

"In a world full of oppressive governments that hate the freedoms we take for granted, the United Church of Christ has singled out the Jewish people as a target of its disgust and indignation. I would remind the church that Christ was a Jew." - Gary Bauer, Campaign for Working Families

It appears the United Methodist Church isn't the only major Protestant church being infiltrated by the progressive movement.

According to its website, the General Synod of the United Church of Christ voted 508 to 124 to boycott Israeli products made in the West Bank, just like the United Methodist's Baltimore-Washington Conference did. Like the Methodists, the Synod voiced no condemnation of Hamas and other terrorist organizations dedicated to the destruction of Israel; no mention that Israel attained these territories by repelling attacks by these Islamic terrorists; no acknowledgement of Israel's need for a buffer against future attacks by these animals.

Maybe it's time for Christians across the country to vote on boycotting these progressives who are hijacking our churches.

Mike Holz is a member of the Blue Ridge Patriots. The group can be found on Facebook or email them at thevoiceofthepatriot@gmail.com.