At least 26 more physicians are running for the House, some for re-election. In all, 20 people with medical degrees serve in Congress today, 17 in the House and three in the Senate, a number that has doubled over the last decade, according to the American Medical Association. (By contrast, a Johns Hopkins University study found that from 1960 to 2004, only 25 physicians served in either the House or the Senate.)

Why are so many physicians willing to trade their white coats — not to mention the autonomy, respect and high salary — for a job that can be so frustrating that it is now sending one veteran politician after another into retirement?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Medicine has so changed, and it’s not necessarily the Affordable Care Act,” said Senator Tom Coburn, Republican of Oklahoma, who had a family medical practice before being elected to the House and later to the Senate.

The senator said today’s doctors have watched the profession undergo tremendous realignments that are shifting doctors’ responsibilities away from patient care, changes they attribute to the government’s inefficacy. And many of them believe they can reverse the course.

“They’re just frustrated,” he said. “They practiced medicine when you could actually spend time with a patient, spend time to listen to them, figure out what’s wrong with them.”

The House’s only psychiatrist, Representative Jim McDermott, Democrat of Washington, offered a more Freudian explanation: the desire for control.

“They want to have their hands right there on the handle so they can pull it one way or another,” he said.

As for the reason so few of them are liberal — out of the 17 medical doctors in the House, Representative McDermott is one of only four who are Democrats — he said he believed that politically conservative physicians were more likely to chafe at the direction of changes in health care, with greater oversight by the government and a more regulated role for the private sector. “It’s a fundamental debate about what is in the public good,” he said.

Representative Andy Harris, Republican of Maryland and an anesthesiologist, said that physicians balked at the idea of lawmakers with no medical experience making decisions that could upend the profession. “For them, it’s a theory,” he said.

In Oregon, Dr. Wehby was recruited to run by Republicans like Senator Coburn as part of an effort to identify candidates who run a lower risk of making the kinds of missteps that cost the party Senate seats in 2012. As a woman and one of the few of her sex to be in pediatric neurosurgery, she can help neutralize the expected critiques from Democrats that Republicans are anti-woman.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I knew if I didn’t try, I’d always feel like I just stood back when things went from bad to worse,” she said.

Many of the doctors in Congress said that they recognized that overachieving, confident personality type, and believed that it was a significant factor in their decision to get into politics.

“When you’re a Type A surgeon, as I am, one thing leads to another,” said Representative Tom Price, a Georgia Republican who is an orthopedic surgeon. “The next thing you know, somebody is asking you to run for office.”

As some of these doctors have learned, however, self-assurance does not always translate into good political sense. Take Milton Wolf, the Kansas radiologist who is running in a contentious Republican primary against Senator Pat Roberts. The radiologist had to apologize after old Facebook posts came to light in which he had shown gruesome X-ray images of gunshot wounds and, in some cases, had mocked the dead and injured.

The two Georgia physicians who are running for the Senate, Paul Broun and Phil Gingrey, both Republican House members, have histories of making controversial statements. Representative Broun called evolution, embryology and the Big Bang theory “lies straight from the pit of hell.”

Representative Gingrey, an obstetrician and gynecologist, defended Todd Akin, the Republican Senate candidate in Missouri who said in 2012 that women’s bodies could prevent pregnancies in cases of “legitimate rape.” At a local Chamber of Commerce breakfast last year, Representative Gingrey said that “he’s partly right on that.”

Then there is Representative Scott DesJarlais, Republican of Tennessee, who practices family medicine. He was fined by the state for having a sexual relationship with two patients.

These kinds of politicians become easy targets for Democrats. Some Republicans worry that Representatives Gingrey and Broun could lose the Georgia seat to a Democrat if one of them becomes the nominee, a notion that Representative Broun rejects. “The only way Republicans are going to lose is if conservatives stay home,” he said.

That is among the reasons Republicans have high hopes for Dr. Wehby. She, too, is aware of the power of those two initials at the end of her name: M.D. Brain surgery jokes aside, she said she thought her profession had prepared her well for the Senate. In the operating room, she said, “you don’t have a lot of time to horse around; time is brain.” And just as with politics, she added, “it’s scary.”