Advertisement - story continues below

I have a friend from Vietnam who grew up there and was present during the Vietnam war. He now lives in the United States.

One day during the small talk after a meal around the dinner table, he said to me, “I lived under communism. I know how they think. I know their methods, their lies, their deceptions to achieve power and control others. I can smell a communist. Barack Obama is a communist.”

That comment has always stuck with me. It scared me at the time, and it frightens me now. If someone who has first hand knowledge of living under a totalitarian system says our Dear Leader is a socialist on steroids, seriously, what has America gotten herself into?

Advertisement – story continues below

I believe today’s progressive in his heart desires nothing less than the control of others. Have you noticed the common thread between Obamacare, Global Warming, Political Correctness, etc, etc? Yep, you guessed it. The common thread is that all of these are essentially ways to control the actions of other human beings.

Vladimir Lenin and the Bolsheviks had this art down to a science. The Bolsheviks essentially stole power and instituted authoritarian rule by promising the fruits of communism to the masses, all the while killing those who did not agree with them. They promised higher wages for the proletariat, or the blue-collar worker; they promised an egalitarian society (colorblind); they promised equal outcomes for everyone; and they promised a job and a living wage.

Does all of this sound familiar?

Advertisement – story continues below

It’s familiar because these are essentially the talking points of today’s Democratic Party and their supporters in the labor movement, which having been discredited in the private sector is today essentially the communist party running the federal government of the United States.

Lenin was famous for saying, “A lie told often enough becomes the truth.” Today, in addition to the Democratic Party and their supporters, we have the so-called Mainstream Media spreading the lies of the communists within our midst. The fifth estate of the United States has become corrupt and is assisting in the control of others. This is why the Left and the media (or are they one in the same?) get so angry with independent and right-of-center-leaning media outlets such as Western Journalism. These entities don’t fit their narrative and don’t spew the party line. In short, they can’t control them.

That is also why the Left also gets so angry about Second Amendment rights. Because at the end of the day, when the agenda is control, it’s hard to control someone holding a semi-automatic weapon. Just ask the federal agents who had to back off from the Bundy Ranch situation.

Does anyone think that the feds would have quit killing cows had they not been stopped by armed citizens? The first thing the communists did after killing all the intellectuals, professionals, patriots, and anyone else who could think for themselves was to confiscate all the weapons. And then they proceeded to become the biggest mass murderers in history–Lenin, Stalin, Mao, and so on.

Advertisement – story continues below

That is why it is so important to fight for our freedoms and for the America we once knew. It’s not for us; it’s for our children. They deserve to not be controlled and to enjoy the freedoms that America once stood for and could again. That is, if we can call progressives for what they are: card-carrying communists.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.