AP

In a fresh bid to improve the health of the nations’ work force, the CEOs of more than 20 companies are joining forces with the American Heart Association to encourage smoking cessation, weight loss and a host of other health improvements. And they say they’ll really put their backs into it.

The CEOs, whose companies employ a total of some 2 million of the nation’s 130 million workers, say they pledge to play an active and visible role themselves in their companies’ prevention practices to set the example.

One case: Terry Lundgren, CEO of Macy’s Inc. and a co-chairman of the effort, said he often gets off an elevator a couple of floor below his office and takes stairs the rest of the way. He also participates in a company 5K race.

“If we can some positive impact on this multi-million group of individuals,” he said, “we’ll make a lot of progress.”

The initiative will focus on improving employee compliance with seven health factors, dubbed Life’s Simple 7 by the AHA. These include smoking status, body mass index, physical activity, healthy eating and measures of cholesterol, high blood pressure and blood sugar.

The risks are “preventable and behavior-oriented” and based on scientific research, said Nancy Brown, CEO of the heart association and a co-leader of the effort. Meeting criteria for even three or four of the health indicators can reduce a person’s risk of heart-related death by more than 50%, research suggests.

One tool leaders expect to prove instrumental to the effort is the ubiquitous smart phone, along with fitness devices and apps that enable consumers to measure and monitor their own health habits.

Henry Kravis, CEO of private-equity company KKR & Co., and co-leader of the initiative says such devices could help enable both individuals and companies track their progress against the health measures. He even envisions companies competing against each other to improve the health-status of their employees.

“Nothing succeeds like some competition and incentives” to help achieve such goals, he said.

CEOs from Merck & Co., Humana Inc., CVS Caremark Corp. and Kaiser Permanente, the big California-based health plan are among other participants. The group plans to recruit more members.

Part of workplace health is helping workers find a balance between work and family life. Merck CEO Ken Frazier said one way he sets an example is by regularly taking time off between noon on Saturday and 4 p.m. Sunday.

AP

In announcing the effort Tuesday, the AHA and 22 CEOs that comprise the American Heart Association CEO Roundtable released results of a survey that suggests employees of U.S. companies overestimate how healthy they are, potentially putting them at higher risk for cardiovascular and other diseases than they think.

The survey of 2,004 U.S. workers conducted by roundtable member Nielsen Co. found that 74% considered themselves in good or very good health, but of those, 42% had actually been diagnosed with a chronic condition such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol or diabetes.

People with such preexisting conditions can be expensive to insure, and under the Affordable Care Act, insurers can no longer refuse coverage because of a person’s their health.

Bruce Broussard, CEO of Humana, said that makes it especially important for insurers to support workplace health programs, both inside their companies and among the broader population. For insurers, the idea now is “how can you keep people healthier, as opposed to finding the people who are healthier,” Mr. Broussard said. “That’s an upside-down insurance product.”

The survey also found that employees who believe top level managers support participation in workplace prevention programs at work are nearly twice as likely to report improved health. Without CEO involvement, employees see the programs only as a cost-saving strategy.

Employees cite such workplace wellness programs as important to job satisfaction, recruitment and retention, especially when top management are involved and encourage participation, the survey found.