By of the

As Gov. Scott Walker launched his presidential bid this week, a pair of bloggers have had unprecented access to his campaign.

Walker's sons, Matt and Alex, have been writing "The Trail," a series of campaign trail notes from the two posted on Medium, a blog-publishing platform.

The posts -- four total as of Saturday afternoon -- offer behind-the-scenes glimpses of preparations for the governor's Monday night announcement event in Waukesha, ensuing travel woes, flight delay-induced sleep deprivation, and the family's weekend Winnebago trip around Iowa.

The first post, from Matt Walker, describes the lead-up to the official campaign launch at the Waukesha County Expo Center. Both he and Alex Walker emceed that event.

"Once we got back and the room was packed with supporters, it all began to get so much more real. At that moment, I became overwhelmed with emotion and nerves at the same time," it reads. "For the longest time the announcement just seemed like an idea in the distant future, but seeing the energy in the room woke me up and helped me realize that the day was actually here."

The second, from Alex Walker, describes flight woes and sleep deprivation.

"Announcement day was fun. Waking up at 4:30 AM the next morning… not so much," it reads. "Of course our Dad didn’t mind. As usual, he was ready to go."

But "The Trail" is yet another sign of the prominent role the Walker family is set to play in the governor's 2016 run.

"As the sons of a presidential candidate, Matt and Alex have a front row view of their dad's campaign and are sharing it through their Medium account," Walker campaign spokeswoman AshLee Strong told the Journal Sentinel. "Mrs. Walker, Matt, and Alex are the governor's biggest fans and will be helping share his vision throughout the campaign."

Tonette, and Walker's father, Llew, also participated in Monday's rally, with Tonette introducing her husband and Llew doing the invocation.

The day before the event, Scott, Tonette, Matt and Alex Walker taped their first family interview of the campaign with ABC anchor David Muir for a long profile broadcast Monday on "World News Tonight."

Matt and Alex Walker also did an interview with CNN in advance of Monday's announcement.