If you're looking for a getaway this fall, look no further than the World's Most Beautiful Beaches.

TripAdvisor released a review ranking Panama City Beach as one of the top 20 destinations for affordable vacation rental rates during the fall.

Serving as a bartender since the beginning of the summer at Calypso Resort and Towers in Panama City Beach, Robert Langston said he's seen his fair share of visitors.

"Thousands," Langston said. "There are so many people that come through here every week."

Those include James Pandolfi, who comes down every year from Kentucky to the World's Most Beautiful Beaches.

He said one of the main draws for him is getting more bang for his buck, especially during other times of the year.

"Last year in May when we rented, it was about $1,500 dollars for a week," Pandolfi said. "But now, we've got a 3-bedroom penthouse, and this year it's about $1,600.

Pandolfi said he usually sees about a $300 to $500 drop in rates for vacation rentals in Panama City Beach during the fall.

According to TripAdvisor, if you plan on reserving a 2-bedroom vacation rental for a week in Panama City Beach during the fall, it would cost a little more than $1,000, which they say is about 30 percent cheaper compared to rates during the summer.

Staff at the Palmetto Inn and Suites say it's been a sweet time for them as well.

After selling out for the month of September, they say the reason behind the trend is with the area becoming a year-round destination.

"September and October, it's a gorgeous time to come," General Manager Rikki Coleman said. "Obviously your rates are going to be lower than the summer. The crowd is not as heavy as compared to June and July."

As for Pandolfi, he said he'll keep looking forward to some paradise in the Panhandle all year long.

"Every time you come down here, you think you've done it all, and you find something else to do," Pandolfi said.

Some other nearby destinations ranked in the top 20 by TripAdvisor include Destin, Fort Walton Beach, Miramar Beach, and Seagrove Beach.