Vito A. Gagliardi Sr., who served as New Jersey’s education commissioner between 2000 and 2001, was selected from among 13 applicants to fill a vacancy on the troubled seven-member board and will be sworn in on Wednesday. (Photo: Courtesy of Vito A. Gagliardi Sr.)

BRICK – A former state education commissioner has been selected to fill a vacancy on Brick’s Board of Education.

Vito A. Gagliardi Sr., who served as New Jersey’s education commissioner between 2000 and 2001, was selected from among 13 applicants to fill a vacancy on the troubled seven-member board and will be sworn in on Wednesday.

Ordinarily, school boards choose an applicant when a vacancy arises suddenly. However, Ocean County Interim Superintendent of Schools Todd C. Flora made the selection because the six members of Brick’s board could not agree on a candidate despite multiple votes spread across two meetings.

Flora chose Gagliardi over John Talty, a popular former Brick school board member, and retired superintendent Thomas Gialanella, who led Jackson schools for more than a decade and Toms River schools between 2013 and 2014.

Gagliardi’s career in education spans more than 50 years. In addition to his time as the state education commissioner, he worked as a teacher, principal, superintendent, a policy adviser to the state Senate, and a special assistant to the education commissioner in the late 1990s.

“I don’t intend to direct the board in any way,” Gagliardi, 75, said of his selection. “I would just like to serve the community because of my background.”

Gagliardi will serve through the end of the year.

The board vacancy opened in April when Talty quit while recovering from heart surgery. Talty has since sought to rejoin the board.

The public relationship between Brick’s board members has often turned hostile in the months following Superintendent Walter Uzsenski’s arrest in May. Prosecutors allege Uzsenski was part of a scheme to get his grandson free preschool and transportation at taxpayers’ expense.

Other candidates to the board have said the vitriol stems from its use as a political stepping stone to the Township Council. Two current board members — Michael Conti and Frank Pannucci Jr. — are currently running for four-year terms on the council.

Gagliardi said he is free of local political affiliations.

“I don’t know anyone on the board of education,” he said. “I don’t have an agenda.”

Gagliardi will be sworn in Wednesday at a special meeting which will begin at 6:15 p.m. at Veterans Memorial Middle School, 105 Hendrickson Ave., Brick.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@GannettNJ.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1TmJDvt