Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 GOP primary, Art Laffer, Editor's Picks, Jeb Bush, Kansas, Sam Brownback, Tax cuts, Ted Cruz, trickle-down economics, Elections News, News, Politics News

There are moments, infrequent but poignant, in which I find myself yearning for the good old days of the Jeb Bush presidential campaign. What a time that was – the uncomfortable-in-his-own-skin awkwardness; the sad, pleading earnestness; the inescapable aura of crushing sadness and defeat; the Apple Watch. It was magical. And to counteract all that soul-withering desperation, there was the Jeb Bush promise, the much-mocked and self-evidently overoptimistic guarantee that under President Jeb the United States economy would grow at an annual rate of no less than 4 percent.

That promise was wildly out of step with historical averages – going back to 1968, only one president, Bill Clinton, averaged 4 percent growth over a four-year term. And Jeb based his guarantee off his experience as governor of Florida, when he averaged 4.4 percent statewide growth on the strength of a perilously large housing bubble that catastrophically popped shortly after he left office (somehow that detail never made it into the campaign literature). Regardless, “four-percent growth” was the mantra of Jeb the incurable optimist.

Well, as it turns out, ol’ Jeb was nothing but a piker. Four percent? That’s a loser’s goal. Because here comes Ted Cruz, the last man standing between Donald Trump and the Republican nomination, promising America that under his watch the economy will zip along at “a minimum of five-percent GDP growth.” Five percent! As you might guess, that’s an even rarer accomplishment than Jeb’s guaranteed 4 percent. Harry Truman enjoyed 6.5 percent average growth in the post-war economic boom; the Kennedy-Johnson administration of the early ’60s cleared 5 percent average growth; and since then no president has broken the 5 percent barrier for a single term. Cruz is promising not just to break that trend but to deliver sustained growth at or above 5 percent.

How’s he going to get there? Well, Ted Cruz has a plan. Per CNN: “Cruz says it’s about going back to Reagan-style economics: cut taxes, scale back regulation on business and repeal Obamacare.” Ted Cruz’s tax plan is unique in that it represents the most radical and aggressive upward redistribution of wealth of any of the plans offered by 2016 Republicans. His big idea is to completely restructure the tax code in such a way that the wealthiest Americans will reap massive windfalls. “The overwhelming majority of the plan’s cost (79.6 percent) goes to helping the richest fifth of taxpayers,” Dylan Matthews noted at Vox: “43.7 percent goes to the top 1 percent alone.” And as Bryce Covert writes at ThinkProgress, the assumption at play here – that colossal tax cuts for the wealthiest will trigger massive economic growth – is not backed up by research. What Cruz’s tax cuts will do, however, is explode the national debt by more than $10 trillion in the first decade, according to the Tax Policy Center.