In 2014, for the first time in decades, Denver Health Medical Center didn't just break even – it saw a 4 percent budget increase thanks to the growing economy and, in part, thanks to the number of people who signed up for government-sponsored Medicaid through President Barack Obama's health care law.

But like many hospitals across the country, it will face difficulties paying for the remaining uninsured. Though the patients who are not insured dropped from 27 percent in 2013 to 13 percent in 2014, federal cuts mandated by the health care law in coming years will pose financial difficulties.

"Hospitals are very concerned; we have been concerned all along," says Beth Feldpush, senior vice president of policy and advocacy for America's Essential Hospitals. The organization represents about 250 hospitals like Denver Health, so-called "safety-net hospitals" that serve a high proportion of patients who are homeless, in poverty or in the country illegally.

[SPECIAL REPORT: Healthcare of Tomorrow [News]]

Since 1981, the federal government has helped pay for care hospitals give to patients who can't afford it, through a nationwide fund of $20 billion known as the Disproportionate Share Hospital program. The health care law already has been cutting the Medicare portion of these payments, and beginning in 2017, it is slated to do so with Medicaid as well, gradually cutting the entire Disproportionate Share Hospital fund in half. The assumption is that it won't be needed as much once millions of people sign up for insurance through the health care law.

"These across-the-board reductions assume hospitals are the same, but they are not," says Gerard Anderson, director of the Center for Hospital Finance and Management at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

The Department of Health and Human Services, the federal agency responsible for overseeing the implementation of the health care law, meanwhile has boasted that hospitals are thriving under health care reform. The agency found in a March report, for instance, that the cost of uncompensated care to hospitals dropped by one-fifth in 2014, likely because more people were covered by health insurance.

Part of the success story for some hospitals is in fact attributable to the health care law's mandate that Americans get insurance: The more people are covered, the less there is a need for hospitals to swallow the costs or ask the federal government to pick up the tab.

But the nationwide story isn't the same one faced by some safety-net hospitals.

Two reports released this month – one from New York City, one from Kentucky – quantify how their safety-net hospitals are poised to lose more money than they will gain from the effects of Obamacare.

[READ: Small Town Mayor Pleads With Washington to Save Rural Hospitals]

They serve low-income patients and patients who are in the country illegally, who are not impacted by the law. Because of this, they will not recoup expected costs, and stand to lose the most from Disproportionate Share Hospital cuts. By law, hospitals must treat anyone who comes into their emergency departments, despite their immigration status or ability to pay. Latest estimates from the Pew Research Center show that 11 million immigrants are in the country illegally.

In Colorado, Denver Health alone receives more than a third of the state's total payments, or about $51 million, to help pay its $250 million tab for the uninsured population, says Peg Burnette, Denver Health and Hospital Authority's chief financial officer. The majority of those who recently got coverage after being uninsured also have signed up through Medicaid, which reimburses at a lower rate than private insurance. Though this is preferable to lack of insurance, it still makes costs more challenging to address.

"There needs to be some payment for that," Burnette says. "We need to continue to look at this and I think the [Disproportionate Share Hospital] payments should continue to be made for the next several years at least."

Hospitals that are in states that have not expanded Medicaid likely will face even more financial trouble. Under the law, all states were expected to expand the programs to cover people under a specific income level. In 2012, however, the Supreme Court ruled that this portion of the law was optional. For people who live in one of the 22 states that have not at this time elected to expand the program, there exists a coverage gap for those who make too much money to afford Medicaid, but not enough to afford private plans that are provided at a tax-subsidized rate through the marketplace. In states that expand Medicaid, individuals who make less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level – $16,243 a year for an individual or $33,465 for a family of four – can qualify for the program.

New York, Kentucky and Colorado all expanded Medicaid, but safety net hospitals there are still concerned about their financial future.

Even after the enrollment portion of the health care law is fully implemented in 2016, projections by the journal Health Affairs show that up to 27 million people are expected to remain without health care coverage, and the majority of those people will receive care in safety-net hospitals.

Hospitals say they are hopeful that Congress will continue to move back planned Medicaid cuts, as it has done several times amid insistence from hospitals and the realization that not every state would expand Medicaid.

"We are happy that they have been pushed back, but we would like to see [planned cuts] repealed," says Nancy Galvagni, senior vice president at the Kentucky Hospital Association. "The revenue was expected to be greater than the cuts, but in our state that hasn't been the case."

[RELATED: Fewer Americans Harmed or Killed by Hospital Errors]

Though the cuts will not happen for several years, New York City leaders aren't waiting that long to call for action. City Comptroller Scott Stringer released a report May 11 that showed the loss of cash would result in the hospitals absorbing a 24 percent reduction in costs by 2019. Part of this is because fewer people were insured than expected. The report found rates of uninsurance dropped by only 1.3 percent from July 1, 2013, to June 30, 2014, or during the first period in which people could sign up for coverage.

"Without adequate federal funding, [the hospital system] is heading toward a very dangerous financial position," Stringer said in a statement. He called for increased access to health insurance for immigrants who are in the country illegally, by allowing them to buy plans through tax-subsidized online marketplaces.

The report from the Kentucky Hospital Association – which looked not just at safety-net hospitals but at those across the commonwealth – showed similar warnings about costs, revealing that they would reach nearly $7 billion through 2024 and result in a net loss of $1 billion by 2020.

It also assessed how Kentucky hospitals were dealing with cuts, finding in a survey that more than 65 percent of 109 hospitals reported that they reduced staff, cutting more than 7,700 positions through layoffs, attrition and abolished positions.

Feldpush from America's Essential Hospitals says she anticipates similar reports will emerge from other areas of the country. "The level [of funding] should continue to be looked at by Congress and they should make further changes," she says. "The level of cuts are going to be too deep for a community to sustain."

Anderson says the hospital industry or the government will work to respond, whether that means pushing payments back or hospitals changing how they operate to bring down costs.

"They are always concerned and there is almost always a reason for their concern, but mostly they have either adjusted or the legislation has helped them out enough that they have been able to ultimately do well," he says.