Thompson Schools offers passion-based learning as an alternative to the traditional classroom

Berthoud High School student Matt Cunningham, 17, right, meets with volunteer mentor Lynn Kincanon, left, for the first time in the E3 program on Jan. 30 at Ferguson High School. Kincanon is mentoring Cunningham in poetry writing. ( Amanda Sutherland )

Wanting to create his own senior-level class, 17-year-old Matthew Cunningham formed a partnership with two mentors to get engaged with poetry.

"I want to make it more relevant and get involved," said Cunningham, an 11th-grader at Berthoud High School. "I want to get out there and experience all of it."

In late January, Cunningham began meeting with Loveland poets Lynn Kincanon and Aaron Powers to figure out his interests in poetry, including what he wants to write and study and ways he can get involved as a poet.

"Matt will be able to expand his appreciation and love of poetry," Powers said.

Cunningham is one of six students who is directing his learning and pursuing his passion through E3 Learning CO at Thompson Schools.

E3, or Explore, Engage and Expand, is a continuation of the former Innovation Lab, relocated in September 2013 to Ferguson High School, where other Expanded Learning Opportunities programs also are housed. Another four students requested admission to the program and are in process of applying.

"Students and parents realize there are alternatives and one size doesn't fit all," said Diane McInturff, director of E3 Learning. "Not all learning needs to be in the classroom."

Expanded LearningExpanded Learning Opportunities programs provide students with an out-of-the-box, customized approach to education that is beyond the classroom walls and clocks, said Sheila Pottorff, principal at Ferguson. They include Secondary Options for Achievement Resulting in Success, or SOARS, an online alternative to the traditional classroom, and the Loveland/Berthoud Enrichment Access Program, or LEAP, for home-schooled students.

Advertisement

"It allows students to have ownership, and it empowers students to take charge of their learning," Pottorff said.

In the E3 program, students in grades K-12 have the time and space to pursue their own interests and passions that a school course is unable to address. They can explore various career options and meet with professionals in the fields and industries they are considering.

Students in E3, e3learning.co, are considered half-time with their home school and half-time with the district and are required to spend at least six hours a week at the Ferguson campus. They can take online credits to move at their own pace in core and elective courses, engage in independent studies and sign up for concurrent enrollment in high school and college.

"I think all students deserve to have personalized learning opportunities and, with E3, we're able to facilitate that," said Julie Cunningham, registrar, whose son is Matt. "We're able to accelerate learning for students, customize it to their areas of interest and expand it to options that weren't available to them in brick and mortar."

Mentor RelationshipsE3 students work with one or more mentors, such as artists or business professionals, who meet with them individually on campus and off campus in places like business offices, workshops and artist studios.

The mentors give creative and professional advice, help the students brainstorm ideas and design plans that fit with their goals and learning styles, and guide them in applying what they learn to the real world.

The students demonstrate their learning through portfolios, blogging and presentations of learning.

So far, more than 100 mentors said they are willing to work with the students.

"It's been wonderful to watch these relationships that happen," McInturff said. "Thompson School District supports that personalized learning that's important to kids to keep them engaged and in school."

Satori Bahus-Meyer, a ninth-grader in the program, is working with two mentors, including Loveland resident Harrison Hand, a trans-media storyteller.

The 14-year-old is editing her screenplay, "Heart of Fire," based on an e-book she published in late 2013, and Hand is helping her build a platform and market her work.

"I get to do what I love and find better ways to do it and improve on those skills," Bahus-Meyer said. "In regular school, you don't get credit for what you're doing outside school ... even if it's just as amazing."

Julie Cunningham has seen her son improve in his academic performance from his participation in the E3 program.

"His traditional classroom work is improving, because he's more engaged," she said. "He's seen a purpose to what he's doing."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.