Metro Schools superintendent search (Photo: Terminator3D, Getty Images / iStockphoto) Story Highlights Board needs to accept candidate recruiter's list of protocols to make search fair and successful.

The 2015 search failed, but board members and community can unite to make it different this time.

Heed advisory task force's recommendation: “Do not compromise on candidate quality.”

Metro Nashville Public Schools board members will be making their most important decision of the year in May — one that will have an impact on students and schools for at least the next decade and maybe beyond.

The hiring of a new and long-awaited schools director is the board’s most important job, and focus and discipline are paramount. Moreover, they need to know that the whole community is watching.

So are potential candidates, the best of whom may be dissuaded to apply for the job if they feel their tenure will be rife with fights with his or her nine bosses.

The reputation of the board has taken a hit over the years, and it has been described as fractured, divided and dysfunctional.

Social media agitation by some members, continuing fights over charter schools and last year’s failed superintendent search have contributed to that reputation.

To put it bluntly, the message board members need to hear is: Don’t screw this up.

The good news is that the school board, through its chair Sharon Gentry and vice chair Anna Shepherd, sent a message via an MNPS news release on Friday that they want the search to succeed and want the public to be part of the process.

"... we once again ask the community to step up and help guide us to the right decision for the children of Nashville," Gentry said.

The public should take this opportunity to attend forums with the job candidates, submit questions to board members via MNPSDirector.org website or to The Tennessean, which will be broadcasting some of the events.

MNPS has real problems that need urgent solutions. The Nashville Public Education Foundation found through its Project RESET research last year that Nashville schools were performing the most poorly of all school districts in Tennessee.

Compounded on that are a 35 percent mobility rate, a poverty rate that exceeds 70 percent, and the frequent decision that many middle-class parents make to pull their kids from MNPS and move to surrounding counties because they believe they will get a better education in Williamson, Wilson or Sumner counties, for example.

Nashville Mayor Megan Barry has made a solid commitment to partner with the school board in helping with the superintendent search.

Her office, the foundation and community groups led a 17-member task force that developed 10 attributes the new superintendent should possess.

The attributes include consensus building in the community, implementing change without being unnecessarily disruptive to educators, and experience working with diverse student populations.

The task force urged the board to cast a wide net, think “outside the box” and not make compensation an impediment. Perhaps the strongest statement: “Do not compromise on candidate quality.”

In their recommendations, task force members wrote: “We believe this search could not only yield a strong, innovative leader who can take our schools forward on an accelerated path, but also turn the page to a new chapter in Nashville’s pursuit of a world-class public school system.”

The task force also developed a community survey, which 5,000 people took, one-third of them educators, a clear indication of the great interest in the search and the process.

On Tuesday Jim Huge, the school director search recruiter, provided board members a list of protocols to follow to ensure fairness and equity in the process.

The protocols are perfectly reasonable, asking board members not to compromise the process by demanding promises or political commitments from director candidates.

That’s especially necessary as five board seats are up for election in August, with four incumbents running for re-election: Gentry, Will Pinkston, Amy Frogge and Jill Speering. Elissa Kim has decided not to run again.

It will be very tempting to let politics get in the way of the search.

However, members of the public, through the task force survey, have sent the message that they are not pleased with the present direction of the school system and that they are worried about losing more ground and talent.

That is why the task force has put so much emphasis on unity and cooperation between the school board and the community.

This is a great opportunity for the school board.

While the timeline is tight — the process goes May 3-15 — board members have the opportunity to do something great by hiring the person who will become the best public schools director in America.

The children of Nashville deserve no less.

Opinion Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

Metro Schools superintendent search timeline

May 3 at 4 p.m.: Presentation of first slate of candidates, Board room (2601 Bransford Ave., 37204)

May 5, 8:30 a.m.to 6 p.m.: First round of candidate interviews, Board room

May 6 at 8:30 a.m.: Selection of second round of candidates, Board room

May 9-12: Second round of candidate interviews

May 10, 6-7:30 p.m.: Community forum with a finalist, Maplewood High (401 Walton Lane, 37216)*

May 11, 6-7:30 p.m.: Community forum with a finalist,Creswell Middle Prep School of the Arts (3500 John Mallette Drive, 37218)*

May 12, 6-7:30 p.m.: Community forum with a finalist, Overton High School (4820 Franklin Road, 37220)*

May 13, 8:30 a.m.: Discussion of next steps in selection, Board room

May 13-15: Salary negotiation and contract ratification

* Community forums are tentative at this point.

List of protocols for the school board from director search recruiter Jim Huge

When evaluating candidates, look at the total package: demonstrated successes, experience, skills and personality. Please do not use one factor as an eliminator, but rather if you have a concern, ask the candidate about it. While we are obviously thoroughly checking references as part of our due diligence, I urge you to review information about the candidates and where appropriate, to check other potential references as you see fit. If you find anything that concerns you, please ask me about it and I will follow up and bring my findings back to you. To ensure fairness, and prevent any misperceptions, I strongly advise that board members have no direct contact with candidates or prospective candidates outside the formal interview process until after the selection process is concluded. This is critically important both to protect the integrity of the public process but also to avoid any appearance of influence. This goes without saying but under no circumstances — formally or informally — should any candidate be asked to make explicit personnel or political commitments of any kind. A hiring decision must be made on skill and vision, not on political maneuvering or confidential commitments. This is usually the most interesting and enjoyable time in the search process — your opportunity to get to know each candidate, learn from them, and showcase your community and district. As you know, while we are looking at them, each candidate is looking at Metro Nashville to see if it is a fit for their skills. One area each candidate will consider is Board conduct — especially the ability to engage in civil discourse at Board meetings as well as individually in all interactions with each other and in public statements. I know you are each particularly cognizant of this but I cannot underscore enough that this continue.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1SCKo0j