LAS VEGAS — Fight fans clamored for years to see Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao in the same ring. The anticipation snowballed. And eventually, the wider sporting world was so teased by the possibilities, the bout, when it finally materialized, built into the richest in boxing history.

But the fight that everybody wanted so badly to see became a fight that nobody really wants to watch again.

Mayweather dominated Pacquiao for a unanimous decision late Saturday night in front of 16,507 high-paying fans at a sold-out MGM Grand Garden Arena to unite the 147-pound welterweight championship. Mayweather finally stamped his name, alone, as the No. 1 pound-for-pound king of boxing.

“I knew I had him from Round 1,” Mayweather said. “I’m 10 steps ahead of every fighter.”

In moving his record to 48-0, Mayweather is one victory from reaching Rocky Marciano’s famed record as heavyweight champ in the 1950s. Julio Cesar Chavez holds the record for the longest professional undefeated streak, going 89-0-1 in the 1980s and 1990s.

“This is my era,” Mayweather said. “Right now, I’m TBE.”

“The best ever” is an argument Mayweather can make, but probably won’t win. Years ago, he set himself up as the foil, boxing’s bad guy who’s too talented to touch. It’s an image that spilled outside the ring into domestic violence charges.

But even with a largely pro-Pacquiao crowd chanting “Manny, Manny” to drown out the “Money, Money” chants for Mayweather, it was the champ who won big.

Mayweather immediately earned $100 million, with the paper to prove it.

“The check got nine figures on it, baby,” he said, showing off the payment to reporters.

His earning will probably continue. Cable TV companies were overwhelmed by high demand for the pay-per-view broadcast, and the fight was delayed nearly an hour while the orders piled up.

Mayweather’s mastery as a fighter is his preternatural ability to avoid getting hit. His greasy defense sets him apart. And even when Pacquiao pushed him into corners and against the ropes, Mayweather slipped away.

Pacquiao twice battered a balled-up Mayweather with speed-bag punches, and they split four of the first eight rounds. But after a Pacquiao barrage subsided in the sixth, Mayweather dropped his hands, shook his head and said, “Nope.”

Mayweather cruised through the final five rounds. He landed 148 of his 435 punches, according to CompuBox statistics. They included 81 of 168 power shots. Pacquiao connected with just 81 total hits of 429 thrown — just a 19 percent rate.

If Mayweather proved he’s at the top of the boxing heap, his ascent didn’t endear him to the mainstream.

“Call me old school, but I like the fans getting their money’s worth by watching an action-packed fight,” said Oscar De La Hoya, the last transcendent boxing champion, who eventually lost to both Mayweather and Pacquiao.

“I’m just not into the boxing, running style. I like jumping out of my seat because a fight was exciting and the fans got their money’s worth.”

Because this is boxing, a minor controversy surfaced after the fight. Pacquiao said he fought with an injured shoulder suffered nearly three weeks ago in sparring. And his punches were largely left-handed.

His camp, though, claimed the Nevada State Athletic Commission refused to allow for anti-inflammatory shots before the fight. The commission said it was never informed of an injury until about an hour before the fight.

“It’s part of the game,” Pacquiao said. “I don’t want to make alibis or complaints or anything.”

Injury or not, there was nothing left in doubt between Mayweather and Pacquiao. There was no rematch clause written into their contract. And it’s unlikely they’ll fight again.

Pacquiao, a congressman in the Philippines, remains a box office draw, although his worthy opponents are dwindling.

Mayweather, who now owns five titles across two weight divisions, said he will relinquish his belts to give younger fighters a chance at championships. As the agreed-upon No. 1 pound-for-pound champ, his titles are irrelevant.

But Mayweather, who has one more fight left on a multiyear TV contract with Showtime, said he will probably retire after one more bout.

That fight, though, isn’t likely to dethrone Mayweather.

“If it was my last fight, I’d find somebody I could beat up real bad,” said Floyd Mayweather Sr., the fighter’s father and trainer. “Somebody who would not cause me any trouble whatsoever.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke