Topics: From the Wires, News

WICHITA, Kan. (AP) — The recent plunge in fuel prices have been a welcome relief across the agricultural sector, helping ease the pain of low grain prices for growers and boosting profits for cattle ranchers.

“Every movement we make in farming takes fuel,” Kansas cattle rancher and hay grower Randy Cree said.

Livestock producers in the Midwest and vegetable growers in the Sun Belt alike are reaping the immediate benefits. And with average retail gas prices for 2015 forecast to be about $1 lower than last year, farmers this spring may end up planting more of energy-intensive crops, such as corn or rice, as the cost to irrigate and cultivate drops.

Consumers, however, shouldn’t expect to see lower prices at the supermarket. Transportation costs constitute only a small slice of those prices, and it takes months, if ever, for cost savings at the farm level to trickle to the shelf sticker.

For years, Cree hasn’t been able to afford to fill the fuel tanks at his farm west of Lawrence. But with the local price of untaxed diesel and regular gasoline both below $2 a gallon, Cree plans to completely fill the two 300-gallon and one 200-gallon tanks.

It takes fuel to feed his 100 cows all winter long, fuel to drive to the feed store. The lower prices will also make “a big difference” this summer. Each time he harvests his hay, his tractor must make three trips over every field — one to mow it, one to rake it, and another to bale it.

“We are hoping that for the first time in a long, long time to have the burden of high fuel prices off our backs — so we can maybe make a little bit of money this year,” Cree said.

Farmers use mostly off-road diesel, for which they don’t pay federal and state taxes, in their tractors and other farm equipment. While diesel averages about 20 cents per gallon more than regular gasoline, road taxes alone can add 14 percent more at the pump. On-road diesel prices nationwide are forecast to average $1.86 a gallon this year — well below the $2.81 per gallon in 2014. And looking into 2016, prices are forecast to average $2.30 a gallon for on-road diesel, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.

That’s good news for farmers who depend on row crops, and who’ve seen farm income drop by as much as 50 percent because of low grain prices.