Two candidates motivated by their opposition to public funding for Planned Parenthood and their support for gun rights are seeking the Republican nomination for the 17th Congressional District seat now held by Democrat Cheri Bustos.

Jack Boccarossa, 69, of Milan, is retired from the Rock Island Arsenal as an engineer and small arms designer, with a stint as a procurement analyst at the Small Business Administration and experience in the private sector as owner of a Christmas tree farm. Patrick Harlan, 36, of Galesburg, is a truck driver and president of the Knox County Tea Party.

Harlan says he would repeal ObamaCare without replacement, returning to “a true free market” in health care, which is contradicted by his desire to retain Medicare and Medicaid, at least for now, “even though it’s socialized medicine.” Those with pre-existing conditions that lock them out of the private health insurance market can receive charitable care, he says. That same fidelity to free market principles would have him gutting the Farm Bill. He’d eliminate any public assistance for crop insurance and ethanol.

He would abolish the Department of Education, the Internal Revenue Service, the Environmental Protection Agency and the National Security Agency on the basis that they interfere with states’ rights. He would eliminate the federal minimum wage for much the same reason. He wants a flat tax of 18 percent and would drop many standard deductions, with a “maybe” on mortgage interest, though he acknowledges that he hasn’t done the math on what that would mean for the federal budget. Reducing the national debt is a top priority. He would give Americans a choice as to whether to participate in Social Security.

He would be a reliable “no” on all free trade agreements, such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership. On immigration, he vows to “seal” the border but calls Donald Trump’s wall “ridiculous.” Regarding the taking of Syrian refugees and others from the Middle East, he says “the majority of Muslims are getting a bad rap” but curiously adds that he would impose an unprecedented religious test for immigration that would keep Muslims out until there are ironclad security assurances, which also does not quite square with his advocacy for religious freedom as codified in the First Amendment. To that, he says the United States is a “Judeo-Christian country.”

On foreign policy matters, Harlan is opposed to the nuclear deal with Iran, reluctant to commit ground troops to fight ISIS, insistent that North Korea is “not that big of a threat” but open to intervening in Ukraine against Russian aggression. He says climate change is a myth.

On abortion he is 100 percent pro-life, no exceptions. He confesses to not knowing much about what the Peoria part of the 17th District wants from its congressman, but ultimately says, “I can’t be any worse than what we have.”

Boccarossa also is a social conservative, saying that “America’s got a hole in its soul,” which he would like to begin repairing, though he is slightly less absolute on abortion (exception for life of the mother) and gun control (generally favors background checks, restricting ownership to the mentally ill) than his opponent. He, too, would repeal ObamaCare, though he’d replace it with Health Savings Accounts, while permitting insurance companies to compete across state lines and implementing tort reform to reduce the cost to consumers.

On the Farm Bill, he says “America must take care of farmers.” Free trade must be “fair trade,” he says, and while he’s open to such agreements, it seems the U.S. “always gets taken.” His purpose in going to Washington would not be to eliminate multiple federal agencies, though he’d tame some to reduce the burden on small business. To that end he’d also simplify the tax code. He, too, would get rid of some deductions.

He calls Trump’s mass deportation plan impractical, says he’s no fan of a wall and believes the borders can be policed and protected with drones and other technologies. He’d push for wider use of the E-verify program but provide a path for citizenship to those who serve in the U.S. military or some other public service such as the Peace Corps and who agree to learn and speak English. He favors immigration restrictions by country, not belief.

On foreign policy, he prefers economic sanctions to war as “a last resort” and can only see committing American troops to the battle against ISIS if part of a real coalition of nations. He’d create a safe haven for Syrian refugees in the Middle East rather than bringing any here. He arguably is Quad Cities-focused, saying his top priority is preservation of the Rock Island Arsenal after years of cuts.

Ultimately, both candidates express support for GOP presidential candidate Ted Cruz of Texas, which may provide the best glimpse into their politics. That said, we're not confident there is any room to the right of Harlan, we find Jack Boccarossa a tad more measured and pragmatic in his positions - which is how we prefer our elected officials regardless of party, as those are the ones who get things done - and he is endorsed. The winner will take on Bustos in November.