North Shore-LIJ Health System, in partnership with a Colorado-based marijuana company, has applied for a medical marijuana license from the state of New York.

The application, the first announced by a health system, is the latest example of C.E.O. Michael Dowling's eagerness to pursue ventures outside the traditional role of a hospital, even to areas where other health systems have shied away.

Two years ago, LIJ created CareConnect, a health insurance company offering plans on the exchange created by the Affordable Care Act, the only private health system in New York to do so. Other academic medical centers said insurance was not one of their core competencies, but LIJ pushed forward and CareConnect continues to expand.

Medical marijuana is an even bolder step because the drug remains illegal under federal law, and health systems rely on government payments from Medicare and Medicaid to survive. Though the Obama administration has pledged to look the other way, many hospitals worry the next administration might take a different approach.

Terence Lynam, spokesman for North Shore-LIJ, said he felt New York's tightly regulated medical marijuana program provided the health system with plenty of legal protection.

The health system is also not investing any funds into the program, Lynam said. The money is being raised by Silverpeak Apothecary, which is licensed in Colorado.

The two entities formed a new corporation, Silverpeak NY LLC, to apply for the license.

“As the largest healthcare provider in the New York metropolitan area with 19 hospitals and more than 400 outpatient physician practices throughout New York City, Long Island and Westchester County, North Shore-LIJ recognizes the importance of our patients having access to every legal option to manage the symptoms of their illness, if there is clinical evidence to support marijuana's use for the condition,” Dowling said in a statement.

LIJ also intends to leverage its research arm, the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, to advance the science behind medical marijuana, looking at its effects on diseases such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, substance abuse, chronic pain, epilepsy, movement disorders and other neurologic conditions, Alzheimer’s disease, Crohn’s, lupus and other autoimmune diseases, leukemia and other cancers.

Medical marijuana applications are due today, and some three dozen companies are set to apply for one of five licenses, which are expected to be awarded by the state next month.

State officials insist medical marijuana will be available in January, an ambitious timeline that will require companies to grow and distribute across the state in less than six months.