Click To View Gallery

Providers have put a lot of time and effort into fine-tuning the patient experience and creating supportive workplaces for staff—and with good reason. But their sights are now resting on another population that’s coming into healthcare buildings: families and visitors.

One of the reasons is that moms, dads, siblings, spouses, and friends are being recognized as important players on patients’ care teams.

Christine Hester Devens, associate principal and interior project designer at AECOM (Minneapolis), attributes the shift in part to healthcare reform. “There’s a lot of talk about patient engagement, and family is a big part of that, especially when you’re dealing with the elderly, children, or even a spouse,” she says.

Family members are now considered a critical part of the healing process, getting more involved in the discharge process and supporting the patient as they transition back home and perform ongoing care. Their engagement can play an important role in reducing preventable readmissions, which could help save facilities from incurring financial penalties to hospitals, as part of the Affordable Care Act.

This new mindset is leading organizations to put more thought and planning muscle into creating appealing spaces that support these caregivers’ needs. While in the past, a waiting room per floor and chair at the patient bedside may have been seen as sufficient, today’s solutions include spacious family zones in the patient room, sibling lounges, outdoor respite spaces, and meditation rooms.

“It’s creating space that’s not just an afterthought,” says Devens. “It’s actually an important area on the unit or a convenient location elsewhere in the facility.”

A more thoughtful approach

One of the biggest drivers for this change is the transition to private patient rooms, with family and visitors more apt to remain in the care setting than retreat to waiting rooms or lounges. Recognizing the positive benefits of loved ones becoming more involved in patients’ treatment and recovery, owners are pursuing modifications to traditional layouts.

During the planning stages of the new Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas, which is set to open in 2015, Walter Jones, senior vice president of facilities planning and development at Parkland Health & Hospital System (Dallas), says a family and patient advisory committee requested the ability for families to reside in patient rooms. Since the facility was switching to private rooms in its new location, dedicated family zones were planned to accommodate the large families that the community hospital has historically seen.

The setting includes comfortable seating, a rollout sofa, workspace, and individual lighting controls, so visitors are able to do whatever they need during the duration of the stay, Jones says. Staff space is located on the opposite side of the room to allow both groups to function with as few obstructions as possible.

These new in-room zones are complemented by more traditional family lounges or respite spaces, from small niches in hallways to dedicated family day rooms at the end of corridors, where visitors can go when a patient is having a procedure, or simply to make a phone call or take a break.

“You have to have that variety,” Jones says. “Fatigue can set in as well, particularly on long stays, so you want to give the visitor the ability to change their scenery.”