John Maltbie San Mateo County Manager John Maltbie wants to invent a future where homelessness ends, children read at grade level and every foster child goes to college. “Are these ambitious goals? Undoubtedly. But great feats are accomplished by those who dare greatly. Silicon Valley and San Mateo County are awash in fine examples of individuals who did just that. They invented the future, which we can do as well,” Maltbie wrote to the Board of Supervisors in a mid-year budget update that will be heard Tuesday. Maltbie sat down with the Daily Journal Monday to discuss the goals he says the county can achieve by 2020 in light of a budget surplus of more than $366 million out of a $1.5 billion general fund budget. The county mandates that 10 percent of the budget is put into reserve but that number is now closer to 20 percent. “The goals are realistic. We live in one of the wealthiest counties in the country and our revenue reflects that,” Maltbie said. With new jobs being created by the private sector throughout the region, housing costs have soared, he said. He points to Google’s expansion into Redwood City and its leasing an entire complex for its employees as an example of how the working poor are having to spend more and more of their incomes on rent. The Board of Supervisors has already started to study a living wage ordinance and Maltbie is recommending the board also study a rent stabilization ordinance. It will take a willingness of the cities in the county, however, to adopt such ordinances, he said. Extra revenue from both Measure A and Measure T have significantly improved the county’s bottom line, he said. Measure A, a half-cent sales tax voters approved in 2012, was expected to generate about $60 million annually but is instead projected to reach the $80 million mark. Measure T is the vehicle rental tax that generates about $1.9 million a year. The passage of the Affordable Care Act has also loosened the financial pressure on the county’s Health System, Maltbie said. Before the ACA, up to 40 percent of residents who used the county’s health system were uninsured, he said. That number is now down to 9 percent with Medi-Cal chipping in to cover costs once on the books for the county. The passage of Proposition 47 in November and the state realignment of prisoners has reduced the county’s jail population and will be “less costly to the general fund,” he said. The county has also developed a strategy to reduce the long-term liability related to pension costs that has improved the financial outlook, he said. With a relatively low homeless population of about 1,800 in the county, Maltbie said the resources are available to put them in housing or provide them with the skills needed to succeed in life. Many homeless in the county, he said, are the working poor who have are not unemployed. “We have the resources, compassion and will to” reach these milestones, he said. Maltbie also envisions every foster child, about 1,300 in the county, graduating high school and going on to at least two years of community college. Currently, only about 59 percent of third-graders in the county are reading at grade level, he said. Funding early preschool and programs to improve reading skills in partnership with local nonprofit service providers are necessary to close the gap, he said. Maltbie has not attached a price tag yet to these new initiatives, however, as the county is in the beginning stages of tackling them. Just a few years ago, these initiatives would not have been on the agenda as the nation suffered through “the greatest financial crisis since the Great Depression,” Maltbie said. But San Mateo County rebounded quickly from the economic downturn and suffered only one year of losses and two years of no growth while other counties were suffering double-digit drops in revenue, said Jim Saco, the county’s budget director. The county’s workforce is now at about 5,400, Saco said, with new jobs expected to be added to the Health System and Sheriff’s Office related to next year’s opening of a new jail, the Maple Street Correctional Center. The county added 57 positions last year for jail needs, Saco said. Maltbie sprinkles in some quotes into the beginning of his budget report from an ancient Chinese proverb, Martin Luther King Jr., John F. Kennedy and high-tech entrepreneur Alan King to support the new initiatives. Maltbie uses King’s quote, “the best way to predict the future is to invent it,” to reflect his own thoughts and to inspire the board toward action. Just prior to the board meeting, the San Francisco Organizing Project/Peninsula Interfaith Action will hold a press conference before participating in the meeting to highlight the effects skyrocketing rents are having on families. Spokeswoman Aracely Mondragon said the group supports Maltbie’s initiatives and wants to encourage the board to support them. The San Mateo County Board of Supervisors meets 9 a.m., Tuesday, 400 County Center, Redwood City. bill@smdailyjournal.com (650) 344-5200 ext. 102