BOULDER — Maybe Chris Derrick’s competitors should have known just how serious he was about defending his U.S. Cross Country Championships title.

He had spent the past few weeks training at 6,035 feet in Colorado Springs with his Portland, Ore.-based Nike team. Friday, he was a man of few words at the pre-race news conference, his gaze aimed at the table before him. He offered only brief responses to the few questions from reporters, most of whom were focused on the presence of University of Colorado alums Jenny Simpson and Brent Vaughn and their chances of winning.

It was expected to be unseasonably warm and comfortable, but by early morning, the warm temperatures and breeze were replaced with autumn-like cross country weather: cloudy, gray, windy and temperatures hovering in the upper 30s, instead of the expected high of 60 degrees.

But Saturday, he showed — despite the relative absence of wins and titles in his otherwise successful career — why no one should have doubted him.

Derrick put as many as 30 seconds between him and the next-closest racer during the open men’s 12K at Flatirons Golf Course. He finished in 36 minutes, 14 seconds — 25 seconds ahead of Luke Puskedra of Eugene, Ore.

“When they let me go (on the third 2K lap), I felt like I was going to win,” said Derrick, 23. “But you never know at altitude. You can collapse pretty quick.

“By the time we started the fourth lap there, I knew that I was still moving well and I felt like that I could build up a big enough lead there that I could hold on.

“I felt really good. My rhythm was good. I was going to wait a little longer, but I felt like I was in a groove, and I felt like they were letting me have it, so I took it.”

Derrick was in the top 10 at the NCAA cross country meet four times while at Stanford, one of only six men to accomplish that feat, but he never won a title. In 2012, he finished fourth at the Olympic trials in the 10,000 meters, missing the U.S. Olympic team by one spot.

At the finish line Saturday, Vaughn and Derrick breathlessly exchanged words.

“He was disappointed in me because I didn’t give him a run,” said Vaughn, who finished sixth in 37:08. “To be honest, (my race) was embarrassing because this is my hometown and I just got blown away. It feels terrible right now, but in the long run it’ll be a good thing, because that’s a good motivator.”

Simpson also had disappointment, finishing second behind a similarly dominant performance from Amy Van Alstine of the newly formed Northern Arizona Elite, based in Flagstaff, Ariz. Van Alstine, who won by 22 seconds in 27:35 in the 8K race, was in disbelief after crossing ahead of Simpson, a two-time Olympian and world champion in the 1,500 meters.

“I’m very, very surprised,” Van Alstine, 26, said after the race. “I know Jenny Simpson; she’s an Olympian. But she’s my competitor, so I didn’t go into it thinking, ‘She’s going to beat me.’ I’m really happy. Amazed.”

The women’s race went out conservatively. Van Alstine expected one of the runners to eventually take control, but when no one did, she decided to take charge, created some space and never relinquished the lead.

“Amy is the most competitive athlete I’ve ever coached,” said Lori Taylor, her college coach from the University of Richmond, who was in attendance. “She obviously has the tools, the work ethic — all the things that everybody has to have.

“I think it’s Amy’s competitiveness that makes her different and always has.”

The race result was a long time coming for Van Alstine, who finished runner-up during the USA Club Cross Country Nationals in Bend, Ore., in December. She has seen flashes of success, but otherwise remains an unheralded runner on the national stage. The win Saturday was the biggest of her career.

“I just felt really good, and I was kind of surprised Jenny wasn’t in front of me,” she said.

Simpson — a 1,500-meter specialist who has the range to compete internationally from 800 meters to 2 miles — had never raced this long in her career. And near the end of the race, it showed in her more labored stride as she sat in fifth place. But as she’s known for on the track, she picked it up during the closing kilometers of the race, passed several racers and ended up in second place.

“As much hype as there was about me coming and this … I was really well aware of how challenging it was going to be,” Simpson said. “I’ve never had to pace out a 5-mile race before. So I really just tried to key off the front group and tried to stay in contact with the lead — and not get too excited too early.”

But she wouldn’t change anything. She had an opportunity to be at the Millrose Games in New York City this weekend, but chose instead to compete in her home training town of Boulder.

“I’m disappointed. I really would have loved to win,” said Simpson, 27. “But the way I fought back in the second (half), I’m really proud of that.”

Daniel Petty: 303-954-1081, dpetty@denverpost.com or twitter.com/danielpetty

U.S. Cross Country Championships Results

Women’s Results (8K)

1. Amy Van Alstine — 27:35

2. Jennifer Simpson — 27:57

3. Mattie Suver — 28:01

4. Kellyn Johnson — 28:13

5. Alisha Williams — 28:19

6. Rochelle Kanuko — 28:23

7. Meghan Peyton — 28:27

8. Alia Gray — 28:38

9. Kara Lubieniecki — 28:49

10. Alexa Rogers — 28:52

Men’s Results (12K)

1. Chris Derrick — 36:14

2. Luke Puskedra — 36:39

3. Bobby Mack III — 36:43

4. Joseph Gray — 36:58

5. Sean Quigley — 37:02

6. Brent Vaughn — 37:08

7. Patrick Smyth — 37:13

8. Jacob Riley — 37:18

9. Christopher Barnicle — 37:19

10. Joe Moore — 37:36