It started with a dead girl, pale and waterlogged, wrapped in plastic, almost beatific in her expressionless peace.

But the death of Laura Palmer in the April 8, 1990 ABC pilot for “Twin Peaks” was merely the starting point. The mystery unfolded over two seasons of bizarre, disturbing, laugh-out-loud funny episodes, influencing shows to this day with its otherworldly tone, hypnotic imagery and jazzy soundtrack.

Nearly 25 years and countless imitators later, co-creator David Lynch and Mark Frost’s dark soap opera — and the Lynch-directed prequel film, “Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me” — is getting its high-def due with a new Blu-ray boxed set (released July 29) and theatrical marathons across the country, including in Littleton.

“David Lynch actually willed it to be this way,” said Keith Garcia, creative manager for the Alamo Drafthouse Littleton. “His decree was that the only way to truly experience ‘Twin Peaks’ was to get as close to a movie theater setting as possible — complete blackness, really great audio, a perfect picture — and just go with it.”

Fans of the show and its spinoff movie can do just that on Aug. 16 when the Drafthouse screens the entire series (yep, all 30 hour-long episodes) in a continuous marathon, followed on Aug. 20 by a 35-millimeter screening of the notably darker, harsher 1992 curio “Fire Walk With Me.”

“People will probably begin questioning their involvement in the 24-hour marathon once we get deep into the second season,” Garcia said. “But this show came out before we had binge watching, so I have a feeling there will still be some people sticking around. Maybe that weird, cliff’s edge of sleep that you start feeling around Season 2 is the mysterious tool you need to actually figure out what’s going on in the series.”

“Twin Peaks” is dripping with trademark Lynchian weirdness, which comes as much from subconscious dream logic as police procedural tropes and the school of absurdist humor.

The brilliant casting also helped, with Lynch muse Kyle MacLachlan playing FBI special agent Dale Cooper, a young Lara Flynn Boyle as moody high schooler Donna Heyward, Ray Wise as creepy dad/possessed killer Leland Palmer and, of course, Sheryl Lee as the troubled (to put it lightly) homecoming queen Laura Palmer.

“Sheryl Lee as Laura Palmer became this cultural obsession,” Garcia said. “And what a tough role. You had to cast someone that people would care about, not knowing anything about her outside of being the poor girl who got murdered. I remember in Season 1 when (Lee) came back to play Laura’s cousin Maddie and being so excited to see her back on the screen.”

So was Lee.

“I was so grateful to (Lynch) for doing that, because had I just stayed away, it would have had a very different outcome,” said Lee, who grew up in Boulder and was in Loveland last week as a featured artist at the Arise Music Festival. “He said, ‘I want to bring you back on the show,’ and I said, ‘I’m dead!’ And he said, ‘Oh, don’t worry, I’ll figure it out.’ “

Lee went on to play Palmer in “Fire Walk With Me,” which followed the character on her final day.

“Because Laura Palmer was dead … there was always this strange sense that people were seeing a ghost when they would see me,” Lee said. “And the feeling of the show did create a lot of fear or discomfort, even if people loved it, even if they were huge fans.”

There are plenty of those these days, and to please the cult of “Twin Peaks” the Drafthouse will offer cherry pie, “damn fine coffee” and doughnuts at its screenings — just as any patron of the Double R Diner would expect.

“The marathon is actually free, but for $30 you can reserve a seat and you’ll get that money back to spend on food and beverage,” Garcia said. “So we’re challenging fans, new and old, to come and at least sit through the first season. After that, the crazed delirium will probably start to take over.”

“TWIN PEAKS” 24-HOUR MARATHON. All 30 episodes of the cult TV series, followed by a 35-milimeter screening of the 1992 prequel “Fire Walk With Me.” TV series starts at noon Aug. 16 at the Alamo Drafthouse Littleton, 7301 S. Santa Fe Dr. Free; $30 seat reservation includes food and beverage. “Fire Walk With Me” screening at 7 p.m. Aug. 20. $10.75. 720-588-4107 or drafthouse.com.