Senator Sherrod Brown joined the “Countdown to get covered” bus tour to alert Miami Valley residents of local resources available for help enrolling in the new health insurance marketplace Tuesday at Wright State University in Fairborn.

By Randy Tucker

Staff Writer

With less than two weeks left to sign up for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act, the group leading the national enrollment effort is canvassing Ohio, reaching out to throngs of uninsured residents with a simple message: If you think you can’t afford health insurance, think again.

“A lot of people have gotten financial assistance to pay for their plans, but that’s something we know a lot of people aren’t aware of,” said Anne Filipic, president of Enroll America, a Washington, D. C.-based nonprofit with ties to the Obama administration. “A lot of people are hesitant to sign up for health insurance because they think they can’t afford it.”

Mayor Nan Whaley, who helped Filipic kick off the Dayton leg of Enroll America’s “Get Covered” bus tour on Tuesday, said she thinks an increasing number of the 42,000 Montgomery County residents eligible for coverage under the health care law are “beginning to pay attention.”

But, she added: “I am surprised at the number of people that don’t know that they have opportunities out there.”

About 85 percent of the nearly 80,000 Ohioans who have signed up for private health plans sold through the state’s health care marketplace were eligible for federal tax credits to help pay premiums and deductibles, according to the latest government report. Ohio mirrored the national rate of those who qualified for some form of tax credit under the health care law, which so far has enrolled more than 5 million Americans, the White House said earlier this week.

Still, only 69 percent of uninsured Americans recently polled by Enroll America, which works with more than 18,000 volunteers and 2,000 partner organizations, knew that financial assistance was available, Filipic said: “I think that says a lot about why some people haven’t taken action.”

As a result, Enroll America is focusing on raising awareness about the availability of subsidized coverage during its nationwide bus tour, which started last week in Texas. Those efforts include attending major sign-up events, including a student-led enrollment effort Tuesday at Wright State University.

Enroll America officials were joined there by student organizers Sasha Cahill and Kellie Roberts, as well as Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio), who ran off a laundry list of benefits for Ohioans under the health care law, commonly referred to as Obamacare.

According to Brown, Ohioans benefiting from the law include more than 140,000 previously uninsured Ohioans who now have private coverage or Medicaid; about 900,000 Ohio seniors who no longer have to pay Medicare Part B deductibles or co-payments for screenings for osteoporosis and other diseases; and about 100,000 young adults who have been allowed to stay on their parents’ health plans until age 26, regardless of whether they attend college, live with their parents or are dependents on a tax return.

When asked about continued opposition to the law from his Republican colleagues in Congress who have voted more than 50 times to repeal the law, Brown said: “It’s not good for this country. When people say repeal Obamacare, they need to explain to the 140,000 Ohioans who have health insurance that they’re going to loose it.”

Brown’s Republican counterpart, Sen. Rob Portman, said the law is too “onerous and complex” to remain on the books as it’s currently written.

“Obamacare should be repealed for everyone and replaced with something that works better,” Portman said. “But until then, I will fight to make sure that this onerous and complex law harms as few Ohioans as possible.”