MOBILE, Alabama - The candidates running for the state Senate in sprawling District 22 offer competing visions that more or less align with their political parties.

The Democrat, Atmore City Council member Susan Smith, told Al.com reporters and editors Tuesday that the Republican supermajority that seized control of the state Legislature in 2010 has made a number of bad choices.

The biggest mistake, she said, was failing to take advantage of federal funds under the Affordable Care Act to expand the state's Medicaid program.

"We've got people who are dying right now," said Smith, whose career included a stint as supervisor of nurses for the Escambia County school system and blood division manager for the southeast region of the American Red Cross. "I believe whoever goes in as governor is going to rectify this."

Republican Greg Albritton, a Conecuh County lawyer seeking a political comeback eight years after losing a GOP primary as a state representative, opposes a Medicaid expansion. But he agreed his Republican colleagues went too far on certain issues.

The missteps - which he declined to specify - resulted from an "exuberance with which us Republicans went forth" after gaining power for the first time in 136 years.

"I think we went overboard on some things, and I think we bit off more than we could do," he said.

The general election is Nov. 4. The winner will earn a salary equal to the state's median household income, a figure that will change over time.

Here is a look at how Albritton and Smith answered questions posed by reporters and editors.

What would be your top priority if elected?

Albritton said he would focus on economic development and streamlining regulations to jumpstart a largely rural district that has struggled during the slow economic recovery following the last recession.

"The state has a large amount of various and sundry regulations and boards and commissions that regulate various things," he said. "Most of these have been passed separately. ... I think we need, as a Legislature, to get a handle on that."

Albritton said he also would work to better develop the district's natural resources. He noted that the area has many oil and gas wells. A refinery would be a good way to keep those resources close to home while providing high-paying jobs.

Smith said her twin focus would be on the economy and education, which she said are linked. She said she strongly supports dual enrollment programs that allow high school students to earn technical certifications at the same time they get their diplomas.

"My first priority would be to start moving Alabama toward the top," she said. "It's about time that Alabama gets off the bottom and gets to the top, and I want to see that happen. We only rank at the top in obesity and prescription drug use."

How would you reform the state's corrections system, and would you be willing to support a tax increase to make reforms?

Albritton said sentencing reforms already have resulted in shorter sentences for some offenses. He said Alabama is "caught between a brick and a hard place." He said the state should look for less expensive ways to incarcerate criminals but added, "We can't do that if the feds continue with their determined delineation of what a prison has to be."

Smith called for expanding programs like LIFE Tech Transition Center in Thomasville, which houses nonviolent criminals and helps them assimilate back into society. She said the transition center, which includes a variety of services, dramatically cuts recidivism. She suggested the defunct Searcy mental hospital in Mount Vernon as a possible location for such a program.

"That's the solution to it," she said.

Asked if the state had the money to build more of those kinds of centers at the same time it continues to maintain the rest of the prison system, she said, "I think they'll have to find it."

Both candidates agreed on one thing: Taxes should not be raised to prop up prisons.

What are your priorities for funds Alabama is set to receive under the RESTORE Act directing fines paid by BP as a result of the Gulf of Mexico oil spill?

Neither candidate endorsed a specific proposal.

"I think the first priority for me would be in the Education Department and in health care," Smith said.

Albritton said the money might be best used to plug budget gaps until the economy improves.

"I don't know that we can target any particular aspect," he said. "We're probably going to have to take and spread this among where the gaps are, where the most egregious gaps are."

It is unclear whether any the suggestions offered by the candidates would win approval given the restrictions on use of the funds.

What tax would you be willing to raise or program would you be willing to cut to close a projected $160 million hole in the state's General Fund.

Albritton said he would not raise taxes and did not offer a specific cut. The most reasonable and politically viable approach likely will be to impose cuts across the board, he said.

"There is no fair and equitable way to tax people. There is no fair and equitable way to cut people," he said. "But when you have to do it, you have to do it. The manner that would have the most Draconian effect would be to spread it as much as possible."

Smith said she favors allowing people to vote on a constitutional amendment to establish a lottery and would be willing to examine whether some or all of those funds could be used to shore up the General Fund.

As far as cuts, she said he would need study the budget. But she said she would protect education.

"We got to quit borrowing from the education budget," she said.

How would you represent a large district that covers all or parts of eight different counties?

The first challenge, Albritton said, is to overcome apathy. But he said he has lived in five of the eight counties and knows the people well. He also noted that members of the U.S. House of Representatives often have large districts.

"The congressional folks do it," he said. "That's something I've got to do."

Smith said the district on a map resembles a deformed seahorse. But she said she was responsible for the same territory when she worked for the Red Cross.

"You have to stay in there with the people. That's the key to it," she said. "Parts of this district really feel like they have no voice."

What do you think of the state's open meetings law?

Both candidates said they support open government. "It should be above table at all times," Smith said.

Albritton said he also supports the law but added that exceptions are appropriate for government bodies to discuss certain personnel issues and matters of litigation.