WINhealth dying after amputated Obamacare kickback

CHEYENNE – Wyoming insurer WINhealth Partners isn’t healthy, and its subscribers will need to find another avenue for health insurance by 2016.

Caitlin Rooney, WINhealth’s director of marketing, communications and community relations said Wednesday in a phone interview that the company may soon be under Wyoming Department of Insurance care to enter state rehabilitation or receivership mode. While it’s unclear what this will mean for the company’s 60 employees, WINhealth is no longer accepting new subscribers and will only serve current subscribers through the end of the year.

“As long as everyone keeps paying premiums we will continue to serve them through the end of the year,” Rooney said.

Earlier this month, the company said it planned to withdraw from the individual insurance market through the federal healthcare exchanges in 2016 after the federal government backed down on promises to pay about $5 million through its risk corridor program. The program sought to guarantee that a company couldn’t go under by assuming too much risk while taking on high-cost subscribers as barriers to entry were removed to the insurance market.

Since risk went up along with uncertainty, the government placed into effect the temporary risk corridors program to reimburse insurers who were experiencing higher-than-expected outflows. It also protected the government by ensuring that insurers didn’t raise premiums to rapidly, according to Rooney. But the federal government came up far short, announcing through the Centers for Medicare and Medical Services that it would only pony up 12.6 percent of the requests. That led to a $4.4 million shortfall at WINhealth that is proving fatal.

“Insurers across the country also had a bad experience – meaning they also had high claims. Really high claims,” Rooney said. “The federal government just doesn’t have the money to pay it.”

For WINhealth, which only has about 8,400 individual members, 5,200 group members and about 3,000 third-party administrator members in Wyoming, that was money they counted on and expected to continue operating.

Wednesday morning, the Wyoming Department of Insurance filed a petition in a Laramie County court to place WINhealth into a rehabilitation/receivership after determining through a series of meetings that the Wyoming insurer is operating under hazardous financial conditions.

“They didn’t have sufficient assets to pay their claims,” said Tom Glause, commissioner of the Wyoming Department of Insurance in a phone interview.

While WINhealth doesn’t yet have a clear picture of what the receivership/rehabilitation request from the state could mean, Rooney said WINhealth is voluntarily surrendering its certificate of authority to be an insurer in the state of Wyoming.

“Assuming it’s granted, [the receivership] will allow the Insurance Department to take over the operations of WINhealth,” Glause said. “We will marshal their assets, we will process and pay their claims and we will see an orderly transition of policy holders to another carrier.”

While the risk corridor hurdle proved too much for WINhealth, Glause said he was confident Wyoming’s other main insurer, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wyoming, can weather the storm.

WINhealth subscribers must continue to pay their dues in order to receive benefits, but both Rooney and Glause indicated if they did so, their claims would be paid before they transition to another carrier. Still, Glause estimated the company would face a $15 million shortfall by Jan. 1. The receivership wouldn’t put the state in jeopardy for the claims, since a third organization created statutorily, the Wyoming Life and Health Guarantee Association, handles insolvencies and deficiencies, assessing all insurance companies to provide payment for deficiencies.

Rooney placed the blame for WINhealth’s probable demise at the feet of the Affordable Care Act.

“I think when we decided to participate in the ACA and exchanges we went all in,” Rooney said. “We took a lot of risks; operated in an environment filled with uncertainties. … We had our heart in it and we fought really hard to make it a positive outcome.”

The negative outcome hurts, she said, leaving 60 employees and thousands of subscribers’ fate in the air.

“I just have no idea how long people will be employed or how many,” she said, noting a core group of employees would need to stick around, at the least.

“It’s painful, I think, for the whole state of Wyoming,” Rooney said. “I think WINhealth was really good for the state. It hurts for our employees and the community.”

Sen. John Barrasso, a former doctor and vocal opponent to the ACA, used WINhealth’s failure as a stump on the senate floor Wednesday morning.

“[WINhealth] said that it had to stop selling Obamacare plans because there was just no way to make money without big taxpayer subsidies coming from Washington,” he said. “This company was already planning to raise rates significantly next year. It turns out that even that wasn’t going to be enough money to make it worthwhile.”

He noted that means only Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wyoming is left to sell on the federal exchange, eliminating the supposedly competitive aspect that the exchanges were supposed to encourage.

Patrick Wolfinbarger contributed to this story.