White House makes one more Medicaid push

With help from Sarah Karlin and Brett Norman.

The White House unveils new Medicaid expansion plan — but it probably won't work. So what will?

Story Continued Below

Medicaid expansion remains the Affordable Care Act's most high-wire political fight. Just look at the battle lines: Nineteen states — essentially all led by Republicans — are holding out. More than 5 million uninsured Americans fall in the resulting coverage gap, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation, including more than 1.3 million people in Texas alone.

Seeking to close that gap, the White House early today announced a new proposal: States can take advantage of three years of full federal funding whenever they join. It's an incentive that would be worth billions in additional federal dollars, if Congress goes for it — and if the holdout states opt in. Pro's Rachana Pradhan has the story here. http://politico.pro/1Zm9qla

NOT A NEW FIGHT — Of course, the White House has already spent years trying to induce these states to join the Medicaid expansion. The Obama administration's most vocal ally in this push? Probably hospitals and health care systems, which have lobbied, long and loud, for expansion. When hospital giant HCA reported a recent spike in uninsured volumes, it blamed Texas's decision to not expand Medicaid.

But with few exceptions, politicians in holdout states aren't budging.

LAMENT OVER MEDICAID — So what would get a state like Texas to expand Medicaid?

I asked someone who'd know: John Davidson, the health policy director for the Texas Public Policy Foundation. (We spoke before the White House released its plan, so our conversation was focused on hypotheticals.)

"Before we can even begin having a debate" about expansion, Davidson told me, "we need to reform the way [Medicaid] is funded and the way it's run." Like many conservative critics of Obamacare, he argues that states lack the tools to rein in spending. Texas, for instance, has two blunt ways to control its rising Medicaid costs: Cut its rates or change how it pays providers. Neither strategy is popular among patients and providers.

So from Davidson's perspective, a tactic like temporarily increasing federal matching dollars won't make Medicaid expansion more palatable. Instead, growing the program will eventually exacerbate existing problems.

And leaders in Medicaid holdout states say they don't want to be even more dependent on federal funds. Alabama legislators on Wednesday grilled that state's Medicaid director over whether the current 70 percent match rate gives the federal government too much control over Alabama's program.

A CONSERVATIVE WISH LIST — Davidson believes that states should be able to add requirements for Medicaid applicants, like proof that they're seeking work, or penalize them for using too many emergency services. And he thinks that CMS should award Medicaid funds as block grants, so states would gain more control over eligibility and benefits.

However, these ideas have been non-starters with the Obama administration and Democratic lawmakers. So who's going to budge? Maybe no one for now. And that's one reason why at this point, Medicaid expansion seems like a clash between a resistable force and an immovable object.

ENROLLMENT NUMBERS HEAD THE WRONG DIRECTION — CMS on Wednesday reported the latest open enrollment numbers: There were 74,239 plan selections through the federal exchange last week. For context, that's the third straight week when enrollment dipped below 84,000 sign-ups, and it's a turnaround from the "unprecedented demand" that CMS was celebrating when nearly 6 million consumers signed up for coverage by Dec. 17. What's going on, and what does it mean? Chalk one or two slow weeks up to the holidays, but three makes a trend — and that's why prognosticator Charles Gaba says he's dropping his estimate for total open enrollment by about 700,000 sign-ups. There are still a few weeks for the numbers to rebound. Barring an extension, open enrollment ends Jan. 31.

Happy Thursday morning — where I'm still getting mileage out of this "West Wing"-themed tweet. Credit to Pro's Marty Kady for the nudge and NBC's Sam Seaborn for the words.

I'd love your feedback on how Pulse is faring under a Diamond — and how to make it shine even brighter — and get your tips and takes. Find me at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

PLEASE, DON'T DRINK THE WATER — A horrifying public health crisis is unfolding in Michigan, and it seemingly gets worse by the day. The city of Flint is already reeling over dangerous levels of lead in the water, but on Wednesday, Gov. Rick Snyder announced that there's also been a significant spike in cases of Legionnaires' disease in the surrounding county, leading to 10 deaths across the past 18 months. It's not clear if the two problems are connected — but it's not clear that they're not connected either, if you catch my drift. Our story for Pros.

BIO'S ON BOARD FOR 'MOON SHOT' — ON ONE CONDITION — How’s industry reacting to the White House's big cancer initiative? Pro’s Sarah Karlin checked in with BIO’s Jim Greenwood, who said that he personally approached Vice President Biden after the State of the Union to say that the biotech industry was "delighted" to work on the cancer initiative. But Greenwood, a former GOP congressman, warns that policymakers can't ask biotech firms to cure cancer one day and "beat up" on them the next, especially given the current climate. "Industry is under tremendous pressure now on pricing and we are an easy political target," he told POLITICO. Our story for Pros.

PhRMA: WE'RE DRIVING INNOVATION, TOO — CEO Steven Ubl on Wednesday also applauded the White House's cancer plan, while touting the biopharma industry's own record of innovation. The PhRMA chief points out one eye-catching statistic: The association's members invested more than $51 million in R&D in 2014, well outpacing the roughly $30 billion operating budget for the National Institutes of Health. http://onphr.ma/1UQb5yb

CHALLENGES, OPPORTUNITIES AWAIT WHITE HOUSE — Vice President Joe Biden may announce more specifics about the cancer plan as soon as Friday, when he visits a cancer center in Philadelphia. While we (and the scientific community) anxiously await those details, POLITICO's Brett Norman, Arthur Allen, and Sarah Karlin dug into how the White House’s support could change the status quo and identified some of the barriers that Biden and team are about to encounter. The full story for Pros.

TWO BIG PLAYERS CONTINUE CLASH OVER SINGLE-PAYER — With the Iowa caucuses looming, and the Democratic race tightening, Hillary Clinton's campaign is ramping up attacks on Bernie Sanders' universal coverage plan — an unusual fight, given that coverage expansion is traditionally popular for Democrats. How Clinton's team is framing it: Sanders' plan is unrealistically expensive and could roll back major elements of Obamacare. Pro's Nancy Cook has the story here.

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/1UzbZPw. **

FIRST IN PULSE: THE STATE OF U.S. BUSINESS IS … UNCERTAIN — U.S. Chamber President and CEO Tom Donohue delivers his annual State of American Business address at 9:30 this morning, and health care is on the agenda. "The state of American business in 2016 is filled with uncertainty, risks, and challenges," Donahue will say. "Compliance with Obamacare is costing companies a fortune and it is significantly driving up health care costs." Donahue also will call for regulatory reform, among other policy priorities. "Most of our businesses would like nothing better than to pay their employees more, hire more of them, and provide better benefits," he will stress. "But the current economy and current government policies are making that very difficult."

AROUND TOWN — Also today, MedPAC kicks off a two-day meeting, and Medicare Advantage, Part D, and payment rates are on the agenda:http://1.usa.gov/1KeuseJ

DEPRESSED DOCTORS — In Wednesday's Pulse, I shared the latest concerning numbers about physician burnout. But I didn't go into one contributing factor: Depression. It's widespread — a recent study found that nearly 30 percent of residents show signs of clinical depression — even if doctors don't want to talk about it. Aaron Carroll wrote about this in the New York Times this week, and we briefly caught up on Wednesday to discuss takeaways from his widely shared story.

The doctors' culture of silence is one major problem. "I see far too many physicians who are depressed," Carroll told me, and "not enough who seem open to recognizing that." He added that some doctors even seem to celebrate dysfunction. Carroll says he's heard about a residency program that bragged that its divorce rate was greater than 100 percent — because some residents divorced twice. "They bragged about that," Carroll repeated for emphasis. "I, on the other hand, was horrified."

COMMENTS SPLIT ON CDC OPIOID GUIDELINES — Pro's Brett Norman notes that more than 3,300 comments have been filed on CDC’s draft opioid prescribing guidelines, including challenges from major physician organizations like the American Medical Association and the osteopathic societies. Other doc groups, including the American Academy of Emergency Medicine, are supportive as are some advocates including Consumers Union. The osteopaths register a host of objections and urge CDC to "rethink" the guideline and convene a "broader panel of experts with equal representation of all relevant specialties and stakeholders." The AMA supports some of the 12 recommendations but objects to including recommended dosage thresholds and other key provisions aimed at reining in overprescribing. Wading through the mountain of docs is a tall order for the working group tasked to report back on Jan. 28. You can dig in here: http://1.usa.gov/1m3Qg6O

STATES OPTING FOR HEALTHCARE.GOV MAY BE EXCHANGING PROBLEMS — Top Republicans on the House Energy and Commerce Committee are calling on the Government Accountability Office to investigate how CMS is helping (or not) states that are transitioning from running their own insurance exchanges to the federal exchange. The letter from Chair Fred Upton and colleagues notes that states received nearly $5 billion in grants to help establish their own insurance exchanges, but four of those states — Hawaii, Nevada, New Mexico, and Oregon — have since opted to use Healthcare.gov instead. And it's a newly relevant issue, as Kentucky prepares to transition away from Kynect and join the federal exchange too.http://1.usa.gov/1Rmt80R

CHOCOLATE MILK DOES A BODY GOOD. THE BRAIN, ON THE OTHER HAND … — The University of Maryland has launched an institutional review of an unusual study, which claimed that chocolate milk could improve brain function and reduce concussion-related problems. That's baffling enough, but what's weirder: The university sent out press releases before the study was peer reviewed, published in a journal, or even written up in full. Maybe there's a simple explanation: School officials didn't drink their chocolate milk that day.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Erin Mershon

Drug companies are asking hemophilia patients and their relatives to help sell the drugs to others with the disease — which patient advocates warn can create conflicts of interest. The New York Times: http://nyti.ms/1KerJlA

Could Senate Republicans move forward with their version of Cures without Democratic support? Sen. Richard Burr suggests it to Morning Consult, here: http://bit.ly/1KerNSk

Ron Klain, the White House Ebola Response Coordinator, spells out the lessons learned from the epidemic in the Huffington Post:http://huff.to/1KeusLO

Medicare beneficiaries aren't getting more preventive screenings now that the ACA made them free. CMS is trying to understand why, Modern Healthcare reports: http://bit.ly/1KesTxg

AthenaHealth CEO Jonathan Bush — a former EMT — stopped to give a man CPR on the sidewalk, the Boston Globe reports: http://bit.ly/1Keru9T

** A message from PhRMA: Everyone has a story. We want to hear yours. Whether you are a patient like 9-year-old Ellie, a caregiver like Diane, or a general supporter, we want to hear your story about the positive & transformational impact that medicines have had on you or your loved ones. Submit your story to be part of the “I’m Not Average” campaign today at http://onphr.ma/1PI5n1T. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **