Buy Photo Cook Dan Stahly finishes an order at Crack’d Pot Restaurant and Bakery. (Photo: Emily Spartz / Argus Leader)Buy Photo

Someone opening a new restaurant must beat the odds to succeed.

According to a Forbes report, the National Restaurant Association estimates 30 percent of new restaurant fail in the first year and another 30 percent close in the next two years.

Sioux Falls restaurant owner Charlie Kneip siad some bankers estimate the failure rate for independent restaurants is between 80 percent and 90 percent.

In Sioux Falls, which has a large number of restaurants per capita, several independent restaurants have stood the test of time and offer valuable business lessons for others trying to succeed in the industry. A few examples:

•The Crack'd Pot Restaurant and Bakery, located just north of Russell Street on Minnesota Avenue, is celebrating 40 years in business this year.

•In downtown Sioux Falls, Minervas has stood on the corner of Phillips Avenue and 11th Street since 1977.

•Casa Del Rey on Russell Street has been serving up Mexican cuisine for the past 34 years.

•Kneip opened TC's Referee on 26th Street and Marion Road in 1991 and bought Cherry Creek Grill on East 26th Street in 1999.

Each of these independently owned businesses has a unique history, but all of the owners agreed that providing consistent food and service is integral to maintaining success in the restaurant industry.

"Consistency is very important in a business," said Paul Van Bockern, CEO of WR Hospitality, which owns Minervas. "Even if you consistently don't do such a good job, at least people can count on you for doing a consistently bad job."

But this also is a diverse group of restaurants, proving there is no single path to success.

Decades of dining

Crack'd Pot owner Mike Andersen is the last man standing in what was once a chain of 14 restaurants. His father, Kurt, was one of the core owners of Crack'd Pot and Truck Haven restaurants in South Dakota, Iowa and Nebraska.

The Sioux Falls location opened as part of the chain in 1974. At that time, Kurt was running the restaurant in Omaha.

In 1992, the father and son moved to Sioux Falls to grow Crack'd Pot in the state.

"They wanted to get out at the corporate level from the state of South Dakota because of the video lottery," Andersen said. "At that time, my dad said, 'We'll just take this over.' He asked me if I wanted to go in with him ... and come here to take over the restaurant."

Andersen initially took over the Crack'd Pot's second location on South Minnesota Avenue, which is now Famous Dave's, and when that restaurant closed, moved to take ownership of North Minnesota site in 2000.

"It's definitely made some shifts," he said.

For a period of time after taking the restaurant over from the Crack'd Pot franchise, the restaurant's name changed to KC's Restaurant, after Kurt and Carol Andersen, Mike's parents.

The name was changed back to Crack'd Pot because of customer recognition.

Today, the Crack'd Pot logo has the letters KC in the center as a tribute to Kurt and Carol.

"It's always been the same food," Andersen said, adding that several items have been added to the menu over the years.

"Our cooks can cook anything," he said, noting that among himself, his mother, his son Alex and one employee, the restaurant has more than 100 years of cooking experience.

At age 72, Carol Andersen said she still works regularly as a cook and bakes all of the pies.

Andersen said he hopes Alex eventually will take over Crack'd Pot.

Downtown mainstay

In 1977, Minervas Corner Creperie opened in downtown Sioux Falls.

Van Bockern started the restaurant with Steve Jervik and Don Anderson.

Within five years, Minervas was looking to grow, Van Bockern said. The restaurant expanded to the south, and gradually took over the next space to the south as well.

"Each time we expanded, of course, you enlarge your operation, and it involves more people, more time and more energy," he said.

Through each expansion, Van Bockern said he hasn't really seen the customer demand change.

"Our customers have always expected great food and great service and a hospitable environment," he said. "I don't think those things have changed, but certainly people's education to food, origins of food, healthy food, has certainly changed over the years."

The menu has evolved and diversified, adding pasta and fresh seafood to the traditional offerings.

"We started with the salad bar, and those basics haven't changed for us," Van Bockern said.

Minervas employs approximately 70 people, with 45 full-time staff members.

"Our key management team has been with us for a long time," Van Bockern said. "They've done a wonderful job of continuing to nurture our business and bring along new employees."

Plans for the restaurant include remodeling in 2015 or 2016, depending on the business environment, according to Van Bockern.

"We're working on some plans now," he said. "We generally remodel every 10 years in a pretty substantial way."

Pioneering Mexican fare

Casa Del Rey owner Don Smith said his passion for Mexican food began at a young age. Growing up in a suburb of Denver, Smith said he remembers going to people's homes that were converted into Mexican restaurants.

"You'd get mom and the kids that would serve you, and they'd cook the food ... it was wonderful," he said. "That's how I came to fall in love with Mexican food."

In 1974, Smith opened his first restaurant in Rapid City, and in 1980, he opened Casa Del Rey in Sioux Falls.

When the restaurant opened, Sioux Falls did not have many Mexican food options, Smith said. The first few years were a learning process for diners.

"It really took some years for people to understand that it's just wonderful, great-tasting food," Smith said.

Smith said what has kept him operating for so long is his desire to continue to build his business.

"It comes up in that passion when you smell the food, and you see it," he said. "You just know you love to be here."

Casa Del Rey employs about 20 people, according to Smith, with some employees who have stayed with the restaurant for 30 years.

Hostess Beth Pond has worked at Casa Del Rey for five years, and she said Smith is a hands-on owner who "really loves what he does." She added that the closeness of the employees has been a main factor in keeping her at the restaurant.

"We're really close-knit," Pond said. "It's a really caring environment."

The restaurant specializes in food from both Mexican and New Mexican traditions, and the cooking staff crafts new specials each week in addition to the set menu.

Much of the menu has stayed the same, and Smith said the signature Rey Rito has been the restaurant's No. 1 selling item every month since 1974 when the first restaurant opened. It's a flour tortilla filled with seasoned ground beef, Mexican rice, refried beans, lettuce and sour cream, topped with chile verde and melted cheese.

Long term, Smith said he plans to continue working to inspire his staff and bring in new customers.

"It's really pretty simple," he said. "It's how are we going to get more guests through the door, and how do we take care of them, and that's more of the future planning to me. It's a daily thing."

Neighborhood niches

Kneip opened TC's Referee in 1991, and at the same time, his future restaurant Cherry Creek Grill was opening across town.

In 1999, when Kneip took over Cherry Creek, he wanted both of his restaurants to attract families.

"We are a restaurant that happens to have a sports theme and happens to have a liquor license," Kneip said, emphasizing his businesses' primary role as restaurants, not sports bars. "We are family-friendly."

Early on as a restaurant owner, Kneip said he had to travel often for his daytime job, which meant entrusting day-to-day operations of the restaurant to managers.

"My theory is if you take care of your people, they'll take care of the business," he said. "So I try to take care of them."

Kneip's dedication to taking care of his people led him to continue paying his employees, including servers, full wages while the restaurant was shut down for five weeks during a major remodel in 2013.

He wanted to make sure that when the restaurant reopened customers could come back to recognizable employees.

"We have a lot of regulars," he said. "They appreciate the fact that we have a consistent staff. They may even request a specific server."

With similar menus at both restaurants, Kneip said some of his best sellers include half-pound burgers and chicken wings topped with a signature sauce.

Kneip said he wants to stick with two restaurants and continue to be involved in the community by donating to various charities.

"We (give) a lot of donations to different causes," Kneip said. "We're pretty involved in the community. ... That's our way of doing public relations."

Industry obstacles

While new restaurants face challenges in staying open, the older restaurants in town face a different set of obstacles.

Van Bockern said hiring is more difficult than it ever has been.

"With unemployment in Sioux Falls approaching 2 percent, just about everybody that wants to work is working, and the competition for employees is great," he said.

Van Bockern said Minervas also has to be aware of the changing business environment as the company plans for renovations.

"With health care on the horizon here, not knowing exactly what the government is going to do regarding the Affordable Care Act, we're probably going to tread water just a little bit before we make the next move," he said.

At Crack'd Pot, Andersen said running an independently owned restaurant gets harder every year.

He said customers can expect to see prices go up dramatically as a result of a November ballot measure that raised the minimum wage in South Dakota and set the hourly pay for tipped employees at $4.25, up from $2.13.

The minimum wage increase will go into effect Jan. 1.

Additionally, Andersen said customers and restaurants likely will be affected by rising food prices.

For Smith, one of the greatest challenges of being an independent owner is "keeping that fire in your stomach and in your heart aflame."

"Whatever you have to do to keep that passion alive is how you keep it open," he said. "The rest of it is you have to replace a furnace or buy new dishes ... but the way you keep a place open is through your own desire."

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/16PjcIB