The Citizens Climate Lobby believes a revenue-neutral carbon tax would be an effective, free-market way to fight global warming. (Photo: Sascha Rosenau Njaa/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Conspicuous among Republican presidential hopefuls is their collective lack of support, or outright denial, of the scientific consensus on human contributions to climate change.

Donald Trump, speaking of the unusually cold winter of 2010, told talk radio host Hugh Hewett that unless somebody could prove it to him, he believes there’s weather and that it changes. Trump goes further saying that as president he would eliminate the Environmental Protection Agency; a move that would kill both the messenger as well as the message.

Ignoring the full temperature graph, Ted Cruz reports no recent changes in global temperatures. John Kasich refers to climate change conversations as an area of “legitimate debate.”

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky commented in March to the Cincinnati Enquirer that each side had their own scientists. U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan said in a 2014 debate that he didn’t know if fossil fuels were driving climate change and added, “I don’t think science does either.”

Mainstream Republican office holders may be unwilling to take a public stand on this issue for fear of being forced into a primary by candidates more to their right on climate issues. On this issue, the party does not speak with one voice.

Recognizing the seriousness of this issue, Rep. Chris Gibson, R-N.Y., broke ranks with fellow Republican lawmakers in September and introduced House Resolution 424, which recognizes the reality of climate change and calls for congressional action that recognizes what the world’s atmospheric scientists have been telling us. So far 12 of his Republican colleagues are supporting him.

On Feb. 1, Congressmen Carlos Curbelo, R-Fla., and Ted Deutch, D-Fla., formed a bipartisan House Climate Solutions Caucus to “ explore policy options that address the impacts, causes, and challenges of our changing climate." Recently joining them are Ros-Lehtinen, R-Fla., and Patrick Murphey, D-Fla.

Historically, high-ranking Republican office holders and advisers to past presidents have recognized the threat of climate change. The four most recent EPA administrators who have served both Republican and Democratic presidents have supported a market-based approach such as a tax on carbon to avert the effects of unchecked climate change. As early as 2010, Sen. Lindsey Grahm, R-S.C., said, “My concern is that every day that we delay trying to find a price for carbon is a day that China uses to dominate the green economy”.

Economic advisers of Republican presidents since George H.W. Bush have supported a fee on carbon. Greg Mankiw, chief economic adviser to president George W. Bush noted that “a revenue-neutral carbon tax is the closest thing to a free lunch that economics has to offer.” George Schultz, former secretary of State under President Reagan, shares their view.

Such a plan is currently supported by the rapidly growing non-partisan Citizen’s Climate Lobby, which now has chapters in every congressional district.

Current campaign rhetoric is unsustainable and will need to give way to more thoughtful responses to climate issues. A medical diagnosis with a 97 percent confidence that a lump (think climate change) on our body is a cancer, would cause a reasonable patient to quickly seek treatment. Climate scientists worldwide are 97 percent confident that 2-degree Celsius increase in global temperature will have will have serious consequences for all life on our planet.

My grandchildren and yours as well deserve better than what some candidates are offering. The facts are there. Both candidates need to learn and deliver factual information on climate science. Let’s start with the NASA website.

Terry Auger of Scott is a member of the Citizens Climate Lobby.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1N1k5S3