The Supreme Court has spoken, but Republicans with their eyes on the White House want the last word on Obamacare.

In a victory for President Barack Obama, the high court voted to uphold subsidies available under his namesake health-care law. The large field of 2016 Republican presidential hopefuls quickly ripped the decision, reiterating vows to repeal and replace the law if elected to the White House.

Here’s what they had to say:

Jeb Bush: “As president of the United States, I would make fixing our broken health-care system one of my top priorities. I will work with Congress to repeal and replace this flawed law with conservative reforms that empower consumers with more choices and control over their health care decisions,” former Florida Gov. Bush said in a statement.

Ben Carson: The retired neurosurgeon said the decision represented a “fundamental increase of government control.”

We must #Repeal and replace #Obamacare with sensible consumer empowering solutions that remove govt from the patient/doctor relationship. — Dr. Ben Carson (@RealBenCarson) June 25, 2015

Ted Cruz: The Texas senator says he’s committed to repealing “every single word” of Obamacare.

I remain fully committed to a #FullRepeal of Obamacare. And in 2017 we will do exactly that: https://t.co/d95aQNAiI5 pic.twitter.com/QVjEE7Wkxi — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) June 25, 2015

Carly Fiorina, the former CEO of Hewlett-Packard also called for repeal.

Repeal Obamacare and let the free market—not more crony capitalism—improve access and care for all Americans. http://t.co/qaAR7pNVQJ — Carly Fiorina (@CarlyFiorina) June 25, 2015

Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina senator, said: “Today’s decision only reinforces why we need a president who will bring about real reform that repeals Obamacare and replaces it with a plan that expands consumer choice, increases coverage, delivers better value for the dollar, and gives states more control, without stifling job creation. As president, this is the kind of reform I would put in place.”

Mike Huckabee: The decision “is an out-of-control act of judicial tyranny…As president, I will protect Medicare, repeal Obamacare, and pass real reform that will actually lower costs, while focusing on cures and prevention rather than intervention,” said the former Arkansas governor.

Bobby Jindal: The Louisiana governor said President Obama “would like this to be the end of the debate on Obamacare, but it isn’t. The debate will continue because the law has failed to accomplish its prime objective: Containing health-care costs.” He said conservatives must be fearless and demand “that our leaders in Washington repeal and replace Obamacare with a plan that will lower health-care costs and restore freedom.”

Rand Paul: The Kentucky senator said the decision turns the rule of law and common sense “on its head.”

As President I would make it my mission to repeal #Obamacare, and propose real solutions for our healthcare system. http://t.co/9KHFqbBWwS — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) June 25, 2015

Rick Perry: The former Texas governor called for throwing out and replacing the law, and said in a statement: “We need leadership in the White House that recognizes the folly of having to pass a bill to know what’s in it. We need leadership that understands a heavy-handed, one-size-fits-all policy does nothing to help health outcomes for Americans.”

Marco Rubio, the Florida senator, also says he’s committed to tossing the law and replacing it.

I remain committed to repealing this bad law and replacing it... — Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) June 25, 2015

...with my consumer-centered plan that puts patients and families back in control of their health care decisions. — Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) June 25, 2015

Rick Santorum: The former Pennsylvania senator said the ruling is a reminder the U.S. must elect “a conservative president.”

Today's Supreme Court ruling is another reminder that if we want to get rid of #Obamacare, we must elect a conservative President #RICK2016 — Rick Santorum (@RickSantorum) June 25, 2015

Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, hasn’t yet declared he’s running but is expected to. He’s in the repeal and replace camp as well.

Today's #SCOTUScare ruling means Republicans must redouble their efforts to repeal and replace this destructive & costly law. -SKW — Scott Walker (@ScottWalker) June 25, 2015

More from MarketWatch