The Affordable Care Act has employers scrambling to implement procedures to collect and organize the myriad data tied to health plans that the Internal Revenue Service expects to see starting next year.



Many are behind for various reasons. But for firms like Akron's Apple Growth Partners, employers' seemingly daunting task of complying with those requirements also means new business opportunities that could attract and retain customers.



The new reporting process now involves calculating every full-time employee's monthly expense for an employer's health plan for the first time. The first reports are due in January.



Apple Growth unveiled its own reporting tool this summer called “my aca partner,” a software-based service designed to help employers collect information, test for compliance and even mail forms out to employees as it relates to health care reform.



Led by Susan Burnoski, Apple Growth's director of assurance, my aca partner opens up a slew of new business. Burnoski said the firm already is garnering interest from employers of all types and sizes, from trade groups and school districts to large companies, including a couple with several thousand employees each. Contracts are in the works, she said.



Apple Growth primarily deals with small to midsize, privately held companies on the accounting front, but its ACA product could be applied to any employer of any size.



Rehmann, a Michigan-based accounting firm with offices in Northeast Ohio, is the first to private-license the product. Additional licenses with other accounting firms will remain an ongoing goal, Burnoski said.



“It is a natural fit for us,” said Carl Sorboro, Rehman's director of operations. “Why would we sink development costs to satisfy a client when (Apple Growth was) already so far ahead of the game?”



Sorboro added that there's “definitely a client need” for reporting help and the partnership with Apple Growth will create “a revenue stream for the firm that reaches far beyond 2015.”



That goes for Apple Growth, too.



“We're focusing on Ohio,” said Apple Growth Partners CEO Harold Gaar. “But in terms of working with other accounting firms, it really has no border limits.”





Running out of time

Whether through consulting or offering special, proprietary reporting tools, firms providing accounting, payroll and benefits services are busy helping employers clamoring for ACA compliance. Those without their own niche ACA practices are increasingly partnering with those who do.CBIZ Inc., a large, Cleveland-based professional service firm, began ACA consulting and analysis in 2012.But “the urgency factor has significantly increased” in 2015, said Jim King, vice president and chief operating officer of CBIZ's national employee benefits practice in Cleveland.Through a partnership with SyncStream Solutions LLC, which has established its own ACA reporting tools, CBIZ unveiled its CBIZ ACA CheckPoint tool in December.And those combined efforts already are paying off.“What we found was from 2012 on, our retention is steadily improving, and we believe a lot of that has to do with our work around healthcare reform,” King said.

With federal fines soaring as high as $3,000 per individual not offered an affordable health plan, consultants are telling employers — particularly those with small to midsize and highly nuanced workforces that might include lots of part-time or seasonal staff or collective bargaining units — to evaluate their reporting procedures now, if they haven't already, lest they set themselves up for costly penalties.



John McGowan Jr., a Cleveland partner with BakerHostetler specializing in employee benefits, said clients have been calling in droves this year about how the new ACA reporting requirements affect them.



“And we're telling people they need to do their darndest to comply,” he said.

Many are worried, he said. Some want to know if the new requirements apply to them. Others are asking about what penalties they face if found non compliant. Some are asking about what recourse they have if their vendor botches the reports.

These changes have been looming for years, though. So why the rush now?





Experts say many employers are simply playing catch-up.Large companies either have internal staff dedicated to the new requirements or have been more proactive in finding solutions because of their scale and large staffs. By industry, McGowan said staffing and restaurant companies are among those who have been ahead of the curve.But those smaller and midsize employers with a combination of unique employment arrangements and greater turnover — which can include nonprofits that already tend to be a bit slower on the compliance front, McGowan said, as well as governmental organizations and schools — are more likely to be behind.Some employers have been resistant to implement changes, McGowan said. Some may be negligent. But the reasons why some are behind vary.The IRS didn't actually release the new W2-esque reporting forms (the various 1094 and 1095 forms) until February, so that created some lag.Some have likely dragged their feet because of the fluid deadlines. The smallest tier of affected employers (50 full-time equivalent employees and more) has an extra year to comply compared with their larger counterparts (100 FTE employees and more) who need to be compliant this year to complete their 2016 reports. Those showing at least a “good faith” effort to be compliant, though, as deemed by the IRS, won't be penalized their first year despite any possible errors.Meanwhile, those straddling the border between 50 to 100 FTE employees may just be realizing they're affected after reviewing their books.Others were banking on legal challenges tearing the ACA down, McGowan said. However, the recent Supreme Court ruling proves the ACA is here to stay — at least with the current administration.“I think a lot of people, because of the complexities of it, have buried their heads in the sand and have ignored the requirements and said "I'll deal with it later,'” said David Reyes, a CPA in the tax consulting services group for accounting firm Maloney Novotny.“Some people might not do it until the early part of next year, but there's so much data to gather that it makes sense to be gathering it on a monthly basis as you go along instead of trying to do it once at the end of the year,” Reyes said.Added CBIZ's King, “For those who have been stalling or thinking this is going to go away, they're running out of time.”