Time magazine slapped landslide re-election victor Chris Christie on its Nov. 18 cover with the headline "The Elephant in the Room" below an outsize silhouette of Christie's profile — and a package of stories that question whether he is the savior of the Republican Party. The Star Ledger , which got a sneak-peak of the issue that is available Friday, said New Jersey Gov. Christie's pal, MSNBC host Joe Scarborough, writes about "What the party needs," comparing Christie to GOP icon Ronald Reagan and Garden State hero Bruce Springsteen."For a pro-life conservative running in a deep blue state, it was a performance every bit as dominant as the Boss ripping through a live version of 'Rosalita,'" Scarborough writes of Christie's commanding election win, according to Yahoo News "And like Springsteen himself, Christie made it all look easy."In two other articles in the package, the Ledger reported, White House correspondent Michael Scherer explains "How Chris Christie can win over the GOP, " while Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, authors of the new book "Double Down: Game Change 2012," lay out "What his rivals will use against him."The "Elephant in the Room" cover line is a not-so-veiled reference not only to Christie's party, but to his girth, Yahoo News points out. In "Double Down," the writers revealed that 2012 GOP nominee Mitt Romney passed on picking Christie as a VP running mate in part because of his weight. Since then, Christie has taken steps to shed pounds, undergoing lap-band surgery in February. On Tuesday, he told The New York Times he's more than halfway to meeting his weight-loss goal.Christie has poked fun at himself , too, confessing his weight was "fair game" for comedians. And in an appearance on "The Late Show with David Letterman," he solemnly ate a doughnut while Letterman interviewed him Time has courted controversy before with its covers. Last year, the magazine sparked a firestorm with a cover featuring a 26-year-old woman breastfeeding her 3-year-old son.In its coverage of Christie, the magazine commended him for having "run the Garden State with combustible passion, blunt talk and the kind of bipartisan deal-making that no one seems to do anymore," The Ledger reported."All year long, Christie has presented this character he has created as the savior for the Grand Old Party. His point now is that ideas alone don't win elections . . . From Parsippany to Cape May, Christie's message, often devoid of policy or ideology, was designed and delivered for national consumption."