One of Florida’s largest health insurers is facing complaints about confusing claim denials and doctors disappearing from 2016 plans, leading some consumers to protest they did not get what they bargained for in Florida Blue’s Obamacare coverage.

The company, also known as Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Florida, has apologized and says it is working hard on issues that have surfaced in Palm Beach County in particular.

But that does not wipe away a basic problem with fairness in how the marketplace should operate, as customers like Jeff Gordon of Boynton Beach see it.

“It’s a classic bait and switch,” Gordon said.

Doctors he relied on to be part of the myBlue gold plan when he signed up on healthcare.gov suddenly were gone a few months into 2016, he said. He and his wife were left largely with unfamiliar clinics dozens of miles away, as he tells it.

+ Florida Blue says a Boynton Beach customer office represents one way consumers can resolve problems. ×

But now it’s too late to switch plans and keep the federal subsidy that helps reduce premiums under the Affordable Care Act, he said.

“I’m stuck with them,” he said. “It’s not fair.”

Other complaints have sounded similar themes: “When you finally come to the doctor in 2016, you discovered that doctor that was in network upon your signing up to the plan actually is not included,” a woman identifying herself as a Lakeland customer said on consumeraffairs.com.

Privately, an official at one regional doctor group said they were puzzled by claim denials from Florida Blue early in 2016, but the insurer seemed to offer little resistance when the doctors warned they might be forced to leave the plan — and soon did so.

The problems come after a series of developments, including a GOP-led Congress’ blocking of billions of dollars in “risk corridor” funding designed to help health insurers cushion losses in exchange plans.

UnitedHealthcare, the biggest health insurer in the country, said last month that it plans to exit most Affordable Care Act exchanges by 2017.

So the question arises: Is Florida Blue taking steps to make its own plan unattractive because it fears it is too financially risky?

“No, that is not the case at all,” said Florida Blue spokesman Paul Kluding. “Since the launch of the Affordable Care Act’s marketplace, Florida Blue has offered plans in every county in the state of Florida, and we remain committed to providing health care to all Floridians through the marketplace.”

This issue is “limited to one, new marketplace product, which is designed to provide access to affordable health care to more Floridians,” Kluding said. “This product is focused on improving health outcomes, and therefore, requires greater engagement and collaboration among the patient, the doctor, and Florida Blue. This need for greater engagement has resulted in some modifications to the doctors available in this network, including some who have chosen to no longer participate in this product.”

Florida Blue is not trying to back out of exchange coverage, he said.

“Given the fluctuation of insurers’ participation in the marketplace, there is a significant chance Florida Blue will be the only statewide plan in 2017,” Kluding said. “Unlike other insurers that select only certain counties, we are dedicated to improving the health of all Florida communities while adhering to our mission of helping people and communities achieve better health.”

As for problems in places like Palm Beach County, Kluding said, “We apologize for, and truly regret, any challenges our members have experienced.”

In certain markets, the company said it introduced a new localized health care product, named myBlue, aimed at providing more Floridians access to affordable care.

“We have learned of some issues in Palm Beach County related to selecting a primary care doctor,” Kluding said. “Due to recent changes in the network, some of the myBlue members in Palm Beach County were assigned new primary care doctors, and a small percentage of those have had delays getting appointments. We are actively assisting members with finding convenient primary care doctors and helping them get appointments.”

In Boynton Beach, Gordon said Florida Blue assigned a caseworker he credits with “diligently helping” the family find better options for doctors close to them.

The Florida Office of Insurance Regulation said it is checking on the matter. “The Office will be speaking with Florida Blue to discuss this issue,” spokeswoman Amy Bogner said.

U.S. Health and Human Services officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Florida Blue leads health insurers in total complaints to the state’s Department of Financial Services with more than 1,550 since the start of 2015, records requested by The Palm Beach Post show. That’s complaints on all services, not just Obamacare plans, but it is more than double the next competitor, a unit of UnitedHealthcare.

Florida Blue says it has the most customers, though merging Aetna and Humana appear to be on track to collect the most premium dollars in the state.

“We take member concerns very seriously,” Kluding said. “As the leading insurer in the state, Florida Blue has more than 4 million members in Florida, and the number of issues reported should be considered in the context of our large membership base.”