Q: Is prolotherapy effective for joint or back pain?

A: Prolotherapy is the injection of a nonactive substance — most often dextrose, a form of sugar — into an injured tissue to stimulate inflammation and trigger the body’s natural healing response.

The “prolo” in its name comes from claims that the therapy induces proliferation of new cells in injured tissue. Practitioners inject the substance multiple times during each treatment session, at sites where tendons and ligaments attach to bones — areas considered to have poor blood supplies.

It used to be thought that chronic tendon injuries were caused by inflammation, an out-of-control response by the body attempting to heal itself. These injuries were commonly referred to as tendinitis, the suffix “itis” meaning “inflammation.”

Prolotherapy touts inflammation as the cure, not the problem.

Current understanding is that tendinitis is caused by repetitive motion. Biopsies of chronically sore tendons show a breakdown of the tissues and an absence of the repairing cells typically associated with inflammation. Today many doctors use the terms “tendinosis” — a nonspecific condition involving the tendon — or “tendinopathy” — a disease or disorder involving the tendon — to describe this process instead of “tendinitis.”

Ali Safayan uses prolotherapy at his primary-care practice in Washington.

“We are using dextrose as a decoy,” Safayan says. “In an effort to get the dextrose out of the area, the body floods the area with serum, which has a number of healing factors and materials that are necessary for tissue repair. Essentially, we trick the body into using healing factors already present in serum in higher concentrations.”

Evidence suggests prolotherapy may be effective for some parts of the body and not effective for others. Limited but encouraging evidence exists in support of prolotherapy for treating chronic tendon and ligament injuries caused by overuse.

A small study published in the Clinical Journal of Sports Medicine demonstrated decreased pain and increased strength in patients who received prolotherapy for lateral epicondylosis, commonly known as tennis elbow. Other small studies have also shown promising results for treating chronic injuries in the Achilles tendon, the foot and the hip, as well as arthritis in the knee and finger.

Evidence for treating low back pain with prolotherapy is inconclusive. In 2010, a Cochrane review article, considered the gold standard of medical evidence, looked at the combined results of five studies and did not find sufficient evidence that prolotherapy alone is an effective treatment for chronic low back pain.

An overall theme in prolotherapy research is the lack of good evidence demonstrating its efficacy as only a few high-quality studies have been conducted. More research needs to be done before its effectiveness can be proved or disproved.

Some physicians are skeptical, including Steven Novella, an assistant professor of neurology at the Yale School of Medicine and the founder of the website Science-Based Medicine.

“It seems that the practice and promotion of prolotherapy greatly exceeds what is justified by this preliminary research,” he says. “I would recommend caution to anyone considering this therapy, and certainly I would not believe the hype.”

Prolotherapy is a low-risk procedure that can be performed only by a physician. You may experience soreness and bruising in the injected area, but it generally resolves within 24 to 48 hours. Infection and bleeding are possible complications, but very rare. All patients have some mild discomfort during the procedure.

– Corey Carson, senior resident at the Georgetown University/Providence Hospital Family Medicine Residency, for The Washington Post