Just two days before Arizona voters head to the polls, the Clinton campaign unleashed the first part of a two-pronged attack, with events featuring former president Bill Clinton in Phoenix and Tucson.

Mr. Clinton spoke at a rally in Tucson, before speaking to an estimated 1,000 people at a rally at Central High School in Phoenix.

"She has been, I'm very proud of this, the most outspoken candidate in either party in saying, this idea that we are gonna demonize Muslims and keep them out of America does not make a lick of sense," Mr. Clinton said. "It is dangerous."

[Raw video: Bill Clinton campaigns for Hillary Clinton in Phoenix]

Clinton spoke about his wife's plan to create a more inclusive society, the need to invest in infrastructure and clean energy, and spoke at length about expanding background checks on gun sales.

"If a background check is not completed in three days, it won't kill anybody to wait another 48 hours or so to find out they might be selling a gun to somebody who's going to go out and murder a bunch of innocent people," he said.

Clinton said he's optimistic Democrats can win Arizona in the general election, even though it's only happened twice in the last 68 years. The last Democrat to do it was Bill Clinton in 1996.

"[Former Congresswoman] Gabby Giffords got re-elected twice. [Former Congressman] Ron Barber lost by 167 votes in the worst election in decades for Democrats. So I think so, and I'd like her to try. But first we have to get through the primary."

On Monday, Hillary Clinton will hold her first campaign event in the Grand Canyon State this election cycle, with a rally at Carl Hayden Community High School scheduled for 3:30 p.m.

Meanwhile, Mrs. Clinton's primary opponent, Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders, held four events in Arizona last week, including a rally in downtown Phoenix Saturday that drew more than 11,000 supporters -- his largest crowd of any event so far.

Arizona's presidential preference election is this Tuesday, March 22, with 85 delegates up for grabs on the Democratic side.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.