Callers seeking to buy health insurance through the Massachusetts Health Connector are flooding the Connector's call centers in advance of Friday's deadline to buy coverage for Feb. 1, resulting in long wait times.

"This is unacceptable and horrible customer service," wrote one customer on the Connector's Facebook page, after spending a half hour on hold.

However, despite the customer service problems, more than 195,000 people have used the website to enroll in MassHealth, and 82,000 had enrolled in other subsidized or unsubsidized plans as of Thursday. That is a far cry from last year, when the website was technologically unable to enroll anyone in new plans.

Maydad Cohen, interim executive director at the Health Connector, apologized for the long wait times. "I'm sorry to those of you who have been frustrated by your experience at call centers this week," Cohen said on a conference call with reporters.

But Cohen said the difficulties have been worth it. "So many of you now have access to the health, peace of mind and economic security that goes hand in hand with having health care," Cohen said. Cohen said he will not be satisfied "until every one of our consumers has access to the health care they deserve."

Customers have until midnight Friday to enroll in and pay for health insurance online to have coverage that begins Feb. 1. Call centers will be open until 9 p.m.

State officials have known this would be a busy time for the Connector, since approximately 280,000 people were enrolled in extended or temporary state-subsidized plans that expire between Jan. 15 and Feb. 15. The extensions and temporary coverage were the way the state provided insurance for those unable to enroll in plans that conformed with the Affordable Care Act as a result of last year's website difficulties.

Cohen said as of noon Friday, call centers were experiencing their busiest day of open enrollment and had received over 12,000 calls and handled over 7,000. (The rest of the callers hung up or remained on hold.) The centers had 870 customer service representatives scheduled to work, with 700 of them handling phone calls. Wait times Friday mid-day were averaging 45 minutes for those seeking to pay by phone, 30 minutes for those seeking help with applying or changing an application and 16 minutes for those calling about MassHealth.

Throughout this past week, complaints from customers peppered the Health Connector's Facebook page. Writers complained about long wait times, multiple attempts to contact representatives, and difficulty resolving errors with their applications.

On Tuesday, the Health Connector reported peak call center wait times of 60 minutes, though the average wait time was 10 to 25 minutes, depending on the center. On Wednesday, the average wait time was up to 31 minutes for a call center supporting the Health Connector, according to data provided by the Connector.

Gov. Charlie Baker, asked about the customer service problems on Thursday, said officials have been trying "to make sure the loop gets closed with people who don't get through on the Connector," to ensure their questions are answers and problems are dealt with. He said state officials were talking about extending the deadline – though as of Friday, that had not happened.

Baker has hired Louis Gutierrez as the next head of the Health Connector. Baker predicted that Gutierrez, who comes from an information technology consulting firm, "will be a breath of fresh air with respect to the way he goes about dealing with issues and problems and especially customer service."

Gutierrez begins work a month from Friday.

Final data about how many people chose plans by the deadline for Feb. 1 will not be available until next week. Open enrollment continues until Feb. 15 for those who want to purchase coverage beginning in March.

As of Wednesday, around 45,600 people had used the site to enroll in federal or state-subsidized plans, 31,600 had enrolled in unsubsidized plans and 195,500 enrolled in Medicaid.

MassLive.com reporter Garrett Quinn contributed to this story.