Image via Nueterra.com.

Nueterra, a privately held company formerly specializing in developing equity partnerships and healthcare facilities, has split into a pair of new companies -- NueHealth and Nueterra Capital.

Nueterra Capital will continue the original organization's private equity investment and advisory services. NueHealth, meanwhile, will operate a national system of integrated provider networks that align physicians and connect them to consumers, with the goal of delivering value-based healthcare and improved quality at a lower cost.

Between NueHealth and Nueterra Capital, the company will keep all of its former assets and executive leadership. But the two companies will be more narrowly focused, focusing on specific healthcare-related programs and services: network development, bundled payment programs, custom benefit plans and management, private equity investing and joint venture partnerships among them.

[Also: Tracking 2015 mergers and acquisitions]

Dan Tasset, chairman of Nueterra Capital and NueHealth, said NueHealth's hopes to direct access to transparent and affordable care, while Nueterra Capital "will focus on making investments in the healthcare companies and technologies that will truly advance the future of healthcare."

NueHealth takes the effort that Nueterra had dedicated to physicians and facilities and refocuses that attention on consumers. Chief Operating Officer Tim O'Brien said NueHealth has already demonstrated success in various markets, including one it has dubbed "NueHealth Greater Philadelphia." NGP is built on a partnership with a multi-specialty independent physician association of more than 1,000 providers, and its stated mission is to offer Philadelphia-area employers, insurance companies, and patients greater control over their healthcare spending.

Nueterra Capital will continue to invest in various healthcare companies, focusing on technology, service companies, provider companies, insurance and real estate, with the goal of leveraging investment activity as a means of empowering the companies who are well-situated to create change in the healthcare industry. In addition to investment and strategic planning, the company also provides incubation and back office support for its portfolio companies.

"Dividing ourselves into these two new companies was a targeted decision to make healthcare more simple, more accessible and more advanced," said Tasset.