Sobeys is converting its Queenston and Nash store to a FreshCo. during a series of restructuring moves.

The company is dealing with intense competition as it tries to squeeze savings from its operations after acquiring Safeway in Canada.

Sarah Stover, a spokesperson for Sobeys, said employees were informed of the conversion several weeks ago.

The east Hamilton store will close on June 28 for renovations and open "in the next few months" she said in a statement. There are about 100 employees at the store. Three-quarters of them work part-time.

Stover said the company has tried to place some employees in comparable jobs within the chain. Employees who don't yet have placements could have jobs at the converted store.

"This decision was made following a comprehensive evaluation of our store network," she said. "It was decided that converting this particular location was the best move as we aim to have the right store format in the right market to meet the needs and expectations of our customers."

Stover noted Sobeys is opening new stores in "competitive markets" including two in Ancaster and Burlington.

Other Hamilton stores are not affected.

Parent company Empire Co. plans to close about 50 stores.

Earlier this year, Sobeys announced deals to sell some 30 stores in Western Canada, including 23 that were part of an agreement with the Competition Bureau in connection with its purchase of Canada Safeway last year.

UFCW Canada, the union that represents employees at more than 350 Sobeys, Safeway, IGA and Freshco stores across the country, said in a statement that it will do everything it can to protect the rights of workers affected by the closings, including enforcement of seniority rights and other safeguards in their collective agreement.

The decision comes as Sobeys faces intense price competition from others in the grocery industry, including U.S. retailers like Walmart and Target.

Empire has been reshaping the look of its conglomeration over the past few years, having acquired 236 retail gas locations and convenience stores in Eastern Canada in 2012 and selling off its movie theatre business last summer.

That move included the sale of the Jackson Square cinemas — one of several sold in a $55-million deal to Landmark Cinemas of Canada.

In its fourth-quarter results, Empire reported a profit of $800,000 net of controlling interest, worth a penny per diluted share. That's a decline from $105.9 million or $1.56 per diluted share a year ago.

Consolidated sales for the quarter ended May 3 were $5.94 billion, up from $4.26 billion a year ago, boosted by the $5.8-billion acquisition of Canada Safeway last summer. Sobeys' same-store sales were up 0.2 per cent from the prior year.