Emdeon, which bills itself as one of the largest, independent healthcare technology companies providing analytics, connectivity, communications, payments, consumer engagement and workflow optimization platforms, on Friday announced that the company will rebrand in the fourth quarter as "Change Healthcare."

Emdeon is primarily associated with its revenue management cycle management capabiities. However, company executives say there is much more to it, and the new name better reflects the company's diverse capabilities and platforms.

"The decision to evolve our brand reflects our significant and exciting business transformation over the past three years," Neil de Crescenzo, Emdeon president and CEO, said in a news release. "Today we serve virtually all constituencies in the healthcare system. It is critical that our brand reflects the full breadth and depth of our innovation and capabilities."

Come the fourth quarter, there will be plenty of businesses to align under Change Healthcare. They include:

Chamberlin Edmonds and Associates, a technology-enabled provider of eligibility and enrollment solutions to healthcare providers;

EquiClaim and TC3, which provide payment integrity analytics to healthcare payers;

Goold Health Systems, a technology-enabled provider of pharmacy benefit services primarily to state Medicaid agencies;

HTMS, a management consulting company providing business and technology services for the healthcare market; and

Altegra Health, a recently acquired national provider of technology and intervention platforms that combine data aggregation and analytics with unique member engagement and reporting capabilities to achieve actionable insights and improved management for value-based healthcare.

Emdeon's existing Change Healthcare business, a healthcare consumer engagement and transparency solutions provider acquired in November 2014, will also be rebranded as part of this initiative.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

The foundation of these technologies is the company's Intelligent Healthcare Network, adds de Crescenzo. It facilitates the capture and standardization of healthcare data seamlessly in the customer's workflow, benefiting all major healthcare stakeholders: commercial and governmental payers, employers, hospitals, physician practices, laboratories, pharmacies and consumers.

The company has developed this network of payers and providers over 30 years, he said, and connects to virtually all private and government payers, claim-submitting providers and pharmacies in a hybrid cloud-based, user-centric and secure infrastructure environment.

The company's network processed approximately 8.1 billion healthcare-related transactions, covering $1.2 trillion in claims, in 2014, according to de Crescenzo.

This first appeared on Healthcare IT News. It has been edited.

Twitter: @HFNewsTweet