2 years ago

(CNN) –Hobby Lobby asked the U.S. Supreme Court on Monday for an exemption to the requirement under the Affordable Care Act that certain for-profit corporations provide contraception coverage to their workers.

Ahead of oral arguments next month, the craft store giant is seeking exclusion on religious grounds from the health care law's requirements, maintaining that some contraceptive products, like the morning-after pill, equate to abortion.

Follow @politicalticker

Oral arguments for the case, Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby, begin March 25. The issue is whether secular, private corporations can claim religious exemption from federal laws.

Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., nationwide chain of about 500 arts and crafts stores with about 13,000 employees, was started by David and Barbara Green. They are devoted Christians, who maintain the stores, which are closed on Sundays, remain consistent with their biblical practices.

The Greens' object to contraceptives like the morning-after pill, which they say amounts to abortion and, therefore, violates their faith, but are not opposed to all forms of contraception – such as condoms and diaphragms.

The store estimated that they would face a $1.3 million daily fine beginning January 1 for noncompliance with the health care law after failing to receive temporary relief from the fines from the Supreme Court last year.

Hobby Lobby lead attorney Kyle Duncan of the non-profit Becket Fund for Religious Liberty said its latest brief filed on Monday sharpens the issue.

“No one should be forced to give up their constitutionally protected civil rights just to go into business," Duncan said in a statement.

"The filing demonstrates in no uncertain terms that the government's efforts to strip this family business of its religious rights represent a gross violation of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act and the First Amendment. We are hopeful that the Supreme Court will uphold the 10th Circuit's strong affirmation of the Greens' rights to live out their deeply held beliefs in every aspect of their business."

The Becket Fund also represents the Little Sisters of the Poor, a Catholic charity for the elderly run by nuns, which also filed an appeal to the contraception portion of the law.

While churches and houses of worship are exempt from the mandate, other non-profit, religious-affiliate groups, like church-run hospitals and parochial schools, are still required to either themselves provide contraception coverage or have a third party insurer provide the benefits without the employer's involvement.

For-profit companies like Hobby Lobby are not exempt under the law.

President Barack Obama's sweeping health care law has been the subject of political and religious controversy, specifically the contraception requirements.

Nearly 50 pending lawsuits have been filed in federal court from various corporations challenging birth control coverage under Obamacare.

CNN's Bill Mears and Eric Marrapodi contributed to this report.