Classic American cars as far as 1927 were displayed on Fourth Street in first Hot Cars Cool Nights car show

Scott Hagan shows the original window sticker from 1969 for his Pontiac GTO Judge under its hood at the Hot Cars Cool Nights car show on Fourth Street in Loveland Saturday. ( Sam Lounsberry/ Reporter-Herald )

Vintage hot rods, muscle cars, trucks and sport cars lined Fourth Street Saturday for the first inaugural Hot Cars Cool Nights car show.

Models from as far back as 1927 restored to pristine condition attracted the attention of both children and adults who saw vehicles adorned with fresh paint and chrome. At least 200 cars were entered into the show, according to Josh Allison, who works at The Forge restoration shop, which sponsored the event.

The display of classic American vehicles even drew some international interest, as a German woman visiting a friend in Loveland, Michaela Zahnen, strolled Fourth Street, snapping pictures with her smartphone.

Doug Price inspects the front of his 1970 Dodge Dart for areas to polish before it is judged at the inaugural Hot Cars Cool Nights car show Saturday in Loveland. (Sam Lounsberry/ Reporter-Herald)

"We don't have hot rods in Germany," Zahnen said. "We have old-timer cars, but they're usually like Porsches or Volkswagens. There are some U.S. car shows, but not like this. I'm always really flabbergasted when I see these."

Machines meant for speed accompanied the restored hot rods, too, including a 1969 Ford Torino Talldega with dozens of signatures of famous racers, including members of the NASCAR Hall of Fame, on its radiator. Owners Rick and Sherrie Stanton finished restoring the car in 2004 with parts Rick had collected for over 30 years. The couple from Fullerton, Calif. has since entered the vehicle in about 100 car shows, they said.

"I think there's only two NASCAR Hall of Famers that haven't signed it," Sherrie said.

Advertisement

"Junior Johnson is on there, David Pearson, all these guys are in the Hall of Fame, but at the time (they signed), they weren't in the Hall of Fame," Rick added.

The Talladega topped 250 miles per hour, according to the Stantons.

"It was spinning 7,483 RPM when it did that," Rick said. "1969 was the only year they made them. There's only 752 of these cars. Out of 752, there's not many left."

Famous racers' and NASCAR drivers' signatures decorate the radiator of Rick and Sherrie Stanton's 1969 Ford Torino Talladega at Hot Cars Cool Nights car show in Loveland Saturday. (Sam Lounsberry/ Reporter-Herald)

Doug Prince sat cross-legged in front of the bumper of his 1970 Dodge Dart inspecting the grill for bugs to wipe off before judging for the show's contest started . He bought the car last year in Nebraska, but it was originally built and first sold in Colorado.

"The guy I bought it from, I found the guy who sold it to him, and then I met the guy who built it," Prince said. "Don Smallwood: He lives over in Brighton."

Prince wanted it to look and run the exact same as when it was first built.

"Anything you see on this car, with the exception of the two front seats, they're 1973, would have been optioned in 1970," Prince said.

In the year that he's owned the Dart, he's entered it in five car shows.

"I want it to be correct, correct, correct. I don't care if it's shiny or glittery," Prince said.

Another owner certainly had no interest in the shininess of his car, either. Rust was visible on the hood and body of Scott Hagan's 1969 Pontiac GTO Judge.

"It's the legend, baby," Hagan said.

The Laporte man bought the Judge in North Carolina with all its original parts and has done no replacement or restoration because the original form is more valuable.

"People told me not to touch it or change any parts, which I haven't," Hagan said. "These are what this came on," he said as he pointed to the tires.

"It still runs like a freakin' dream," Hagan finished.

Sam Lounsberry: 970-669-5050, news@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/samlounz.