William Temple, of Brunswick, Ga., dressed as Button Gwinnett, waits in line at the Freedom Summit. (Rainier Ehrhardt/AP)

GREENVILLE, S.C. -- About a dozen Republican candidates and likely hopefuls are pitching themselves to conservative activists here today at the South Carolina Freedom Summit.

The lineup includes Sens. Ted Cruz (Tex.) and Marco Rubio (Fla.), Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, former Texas governor Rick Perry, former senator Rick Santorum, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, Ben Carson, Carly Fiorina and former New York governor George Pataki.

Even Donald Trump is here.

For a preview of the event, check out our interview with Rep. Jeff Duncan (R-S.C.), who is co-hosting it.

The speeches are the main attractions. We'll bring you the highlights here throughout the day. Stay tuned to this space for more!

Scott Walker

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, a potential Republican presidential candidate, slams Obama on his foreign policy at the South Carolina Freedom Summit. (Reuters)

Biggest applause line: "We need a president who is going to back away from that deal In Iran. ... We need a president who will affirm that Israel is our ally and start acting like it."

Palmetto State pander: Walker, a Harley-Davidson enthusiast, said that one of these days he is going to convince his team to let him take a motorcycle ride around South Carolina.

Hillary Clinton hit: "The president and people like Hillary Clinton, when they talk about growth, they are talking about growing the economy in Washington."

Shorter version: I can win because I come from a state that tends to vote for Democrats for president. President Obama's foreign policy has been very bad for the country and our allies. I can get us back on track on both national security and the economy at a crucial moment.

Rick Santorum



Former U.S. senator Rick Santorum. (REUTERS/Harrison McClary)

Implicit shot at potential opponents: "Commander-in-chief is not an entry level position."

Palmetto State pander: "You might have noticed the garnet palmetto tie." (He was mentioning his niece's graduation from the University of South Carolina.)

Shorter version: I should be the president because I have a lot of experience (unlike some others in the field). Our current immigration system is an economic threat to working-class Americans.

Rick Perry



Former Texas governor Rick Perry (Ethan Miller/Getty Images)

Palmetto State pander:

Rick Perry: "Texans are fond of South Carolina. Y'all sent us some help" -- referencing James Bonham and William Barrett Travis at the Alamo — Abby Livingston (@TexasTribAbby) May 9, 2015

I'm-a-bigger-hawk-than-you line: "Terrorist armies must be defeated by strength, not words."

Constitutional zinger: "We don't believe the Constitution is a cafeteria plan where you can pick and choose the ones you like."

Shorter version: We need new leadership. I have a track record of leading. A lot of my potential opponents only offer rhetoric.

Donald Trump



Donald Trump speaks during the National Rifle Association's annual meeting in Nashville, Tennessee April 10, 2015. (Harrison McClary/Reuters)

Response to a heckler: "You're fired."

Criticism of a fellow GOP speaker: Trump was not happy that Scott Walker mentioned wanting to make American great again, because his theme is "Make America Great Again." He's trying to trademark it.

Biggest, loudest applause line: "I don't give a s--- about lobbyists."

On immigration: "The greatest builder is me, and I'm going to build the greatest wall that you have ever seen... And you know who's going to pay for the wall? Mexico."

Shorter version: I hate politicians. I built a real estate empire, starred in a hit TV show, wrote books and made billions and billions of dollars, so running this country would be easy. I am obviously very pro-business and would create more jobs, but I also know a lot about China.

Marco Rubio



Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) speaks at the Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition's forum in Iowa on April 25. (Jim Young/Reuters)

The I'm-the-young-guy comment: "We are still lead by too many people trapped in the past."

Approach to global terrorism: "Have you seen the movie 'Taken,' with Liam Neeson? ...We will look for you. We will find you. And you will kill you."

Shorter version: I am the son of immigrants and come from humble roots. I have the new ideas and new attitude that this country needs.

Ted Cruz



Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) speaking at the National Rifle Association convention, April 10, in Nashville. (Mark Humphrey/AP)

The embarrass-your-kid comment: "Caroline, our 7-year-old, is a rascal."

Applause lines: "We should abolish the IRS," and "We need to repeal every word of Obamacare," and "We need to kill every word of Common Core." (He also prompted laughter by proposing that IRS agents be reassigned to the southern border to scare those trying to sneak into the United States)

Three words he says a president must firmly and regularly use: "Radical. Islamic. Terrorism."

Shorter version: I am a conservative with very firm stances on issues and refuse to become a moderate to win votes. I hate the IRS, just like all of you. Plus, just look at how I can fire up a crowd.

George Pataki



Former New York governor George Pataki, right, speaks with Tony Coutee, left, and Jason Soto, both of Derry, N.H. (Rob Strong/For The Washington Post)

By the numbers: As president, Pataki said he would reduce the federal workforce by "at least 15 percent."

Applause line: Pataki said if it is okay to use art to criticize Christianity, it is okay to have a conference to criticize Islam.

Shorter version: The country faces two big threats: A Washington with too much power and radical Islam.

Bobby Jindal



Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal. (Andrew Harnik/For The Washington Post)

Anti-Obama message: "The greatest danger posed by this president is what he is doing to redefine America."

Hillary Clinton hit: "I've got news for Secretary Clinton. My religious beliefs are not between me and Hillary Clinton. My religious are between me and God, and I'm not changing them, no matter how uncomfortable that makes Secretary Clinton.

Shorter version: Radical Islam and the assault on religious liberty are major threats against America.

Ben Carson



Ben Carson speaks at a luncheon during the Republican National Committtee's "Building on Success" meeting in San Diego. (Earnie Grafton/Reuters)

On his mother: Carson said that many people have told him that they are praying for his mother, who is in the terminal stages of Alzheimer's disease. He spent a few minutes describing her: "She was kind of like that Baltimore mom you saw on television -- except for I never would have been out there in the first place."

The root of all problems: "So many of our problems are linked to a poor economy. This has been a very long recovery." Carson said the stalled economy was a driving force behind the recent riots in Baltimore.

Anti-Obama slam: "There has been plenty of change, but there has been very little hope."

Short version: Usually Carson pitches himself as a non-politician, one who made a name for himself by harshly criticizing President Obama. But in this speech, he instead called for an end to racial tensions and the war on religion.

Carly Fiorina



Carly Fiorina speaks at the Republican Leadership Summit, on April 18, in Nashua, N.H. (Jim Cole/AP)

Hillary Clinton zinger: While Clinton has only answered seven on-the-record questions, she said, "I have answered more than 200 on-the-record questions -- since Monday." (Fiorina then launched into which questions she would ask Clinton.)

On Hewlett-Packard tenure: "I was fired in a boardroom brawl. … Leaders challenge the status quo."

In short: I am a leader with global connections who isn't afraid to challenge the status quo, so my lack of political experience is an asset.