FARGO – Two groups of people are particularly irritating in the increasingly entertaining political scrap between Wayne Stenehjem and Doug Burgum : Democrats and Republicans.

Democrats? In a fight between two Republican governor candidates for the GOP's spot on the November ballot? Yes, Democrats. Many left-leaning North Dakotans, knowing their own party-endorsed candidate has no chance of winning, seemed to view Burgum as their knight in shining armor, a more-acceptable Republican they could support instead of Stenehjem, who they view as a good-old-boy insider who kowtows to the right wing.

Burgum is the hip Fargo guy, the modern tech guru who is socially liberal. He's downtown cool. In today's topsy-turvy world of what constitutes party labels, Burgum almost qualifies as a Democrat because he was outspoken about overturning the state's one-time ban on gay marriage.

At least that was the hope. Not so much anymore. The more Burgum tries to punch holes in Stenehjem's presumably large advantage prior to the June 14 primary, the more Burgum sounds like a boilerplate Republican. He's been spending time blasting Obamacare and accusing Stenehjem of supporting it, which in the GOP universe is akin to coming out in favor of Satan.

This has lefties who were loving Burgum recoiling in horror.

Consider this Facebook post by a person who leans strongly left, though is open-minded enough to consider center-right positions:

More Mike McFeely columns

"OK, I thought Doug Burgum might be a new kind of governor. But after seeing his campaign materials, I'm not so sure. ... His last posting blasts 'Obamacare,' which provided health care insurance and access to thousands of North Dakotans. ... I expected more from candidate Burgum, who I thought might be a centrist/progressive (particularly on social issues, but also on issues that relate to the neediest among us). If he is, in fact, more conservative than our previous state leaders, I guess I will need to reconsider."

The question would be why anybody thought Burgum would be anything but a Republican. He is, after all, a lifetime Republican who has donated copious amounts of cash to the party and GOP candidates. That has been his political world for his entire adult life. Is Burgum suddenly, as a Republican candidate, going to renounce his Republicanism?

There is this, too: Burgum is trying to win the Republican primary. Of course he's going to denounce Obamacare. Of course he's going to lament runaway spending. Of course he's going to promise smaller government. First off, it's likely those are Burgum's actual beliefs. But he also needs to make sure he positions himself politically to attract as many Republican voters as possible because, you know, he's trying to defeat another Republican.

Read Mike's blog

If Democrats were looking to Burgum to be their savior, they were sadly mistaken. They'd be better off viewing him as a slightly more palatable choice than Stenehjem, if they indeed feel he is that.

As for the Republicans, they seem awfully offended Burgum has the audacity to challenge the party's anointed choice in Stenehjem. The party establishment is publicly and privately bashing Burgum as an egomaniac, an opportunist and somebody who won't play by the party rules.

Get over yourselves, ladies and gentlemen. While Burgum's tactics certainly seem clumsy and tone-deaf at times, stepping outside party boundaries is nothing new. Kevin Cramer got to Congress by doing an end-run on the party and walloping the party's chosen candidate, Brian Kalk, in the primary before waltzing in the general election. GOPers stomped their feet, hammered Cramer behind the scenes and, at last check, endorsed him unanimously at the party's state convention earlier this month as he seeks a third term. If Cramer decides to run against Democratic Sen. Heidi Heitkamp in 2018, they'll do the same. Winning has a way of soothing bruised egos.

The gnashing of teeth over Burgum's run seems to have as much to do with a sense of entitlement from entrenched Republicans as anything else. There were those unhappy with Rep. Rick Becker challenging Stenehjem from the right—and Becker went through the convention. There are those unhappy with Burgum because he is running a tough campaign against Stenehjem after ignoring the convention results.

Perhaps this is the result of a one-party state. The machine gets to pick and choose who it wants in what offices, and anybody who dares spin a curveball at the inevitability of it all gets daggers thrown at them. You want a little whine with that cheese?

Stenehjem has nothing to worry about. He'll likely be North Dakota's next governor. He's just going to have to work for it a little harder than anticipated. And there is absolutely nothing wrong with that.