SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

As a growing family, living in expensive New England, MA, business owner and entrepreneur Rob Willington knew he needed to find a way to pay for his family’s medical costs. The options available to him and his family via the Massachusetts Health Connector were limited and unaffordable. As a family of faith, there were also objections to many of the products and services conventional health insurance providers are mandated to cover.

Willington and his wife learned of Liberty HealthShare from a friend and member of the non-profit health care organization that offers affordable medical cost sharing, an alternative way to fund healthcare. The family of six enrolled as members, received their membership cards, and began sending their monthly share amount of $449. The membership was put to the test several months later when their youngest son, Liam, became ill.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

He was admitted to a local hospital with a potentially life threatening illness. Liam’s doctors felt it necessary that his condition required a transfer to a hospital in Boston. Transporting Liam via an ambulance in Boston traffic was a risk that could not be taken and as a result a life flight was called in for transport.

The parents knew of Liam needing the flight, but had worries of the expenses. They were left with the choice of what was better for their son and put Liam on the flight.

Liberty HealthShare members were there for the Willington family; members shared their medical costs 100 percent. This left the Willington’s to concentrate on the health of their son, not medical costs. Here Liam received the specialized treatment needed for his illness and made a full recovery.

The Willington’s show their appreciation by reciprocating each month when they send their monthly share to another member with expenses to pay. The family knows the feeling, first hand, when others across the nation extend their personal, financial and emotional support.

The health ministry consists of people who agree that liberty, freedom and the choice to choose an option that fits best for each individual is a person’s God given right. Liberty HealthShare members are exempt from the individual mandate of Obamacare. Members of Liberty HealthShare take a personal pledge to meet the needs and medical expenses of other members enrolled.

Liberty HealthShare member’s share in up to 100 percent of necessary medical expenses including alternative treatments. As a member, each month there is a pre-determined share amount given to another member who has eligible medical expenses. Liberty HealthShare is a national community of like-minded people, committed to neighbors helping take care of each other’s medical expenses. Memberships are offered for individuals, couples and families.

Liberty HealthShare members have an open network, which means they choose their own doctors and hospitals without the hassle of co-pays. Dealing with medical crisis’ and expenses is stressful; Liberty HealthShare aids in making the situation as easy as possible for the member. There is a team of professionals that will advocate upon the member’s behalf throughout the process to manage the individuals care efficiently.

Liberty HealthShare is a community of people who commit themselves to help pay medical expenses giving members a peace of mind to concentrate on the priorities at hand as opposed to the healthcare costs.

View the Willington family’s story of their experience with being a member of Liberty HealthShare. Check out more about Liberty HealthShare’s sharing guidelines, membership dues and annual unshared amount by visiting www.joinlhs.com or to speak to a member service representative call (800)-722-8041.

Willington Video: https://www.libertyhealthshare.org/testimonial/the-willingtons