Blockbuster drugs and ObamaCare offer a boost to Worldwide Healthcare Trust

Investors in biotechnology funds have enjoyed a rip-roaring year on the back of a booming US stock market, frantic takeover activity and a string of best-selling drugs developed by biotech companies.



But OrbiMed, a leading investment manager in the biotech and healthcare sectors, believes more good times are near as new ‘mega blockbuster’ drugs are made available for multiple sclerosis, hepatitis C and cancer.

Sven Borho, founding partner of OrbiMed, says 2014 could be a ‘transformational year for the biotech sector’ as the US Food and Drug Administration continues its ‘biotechnology friendly’ stance, designed to speed up the approval of drugs for unmet medical needs.



Worldwide Healthcare has exposure to some of the world's biggest drugs firms

He says that by 2016, nine out of the world’s ten best-selling drugs will have been developed by biotech firms, against six now.

New York-based OrbiMed is the world’s largest healthcare-dedicated investment firm, with assets under management of more than £5.5billion.



Gains: The fund will benefit from Barack Obama's care act

For UK investors, it offers two investment trusts, the £297million Biotech Growth fund and the bigger and more broadly invested Worldwide Healthcare fund. Over the past year they have returned 47 per cent and 48 per cent respectively.

As well as investing in biotech companies, Worldwide Healthcare has exposure to some of the world’s biggest drugs firms. It is also invested in businesses that should benefit from the roll out of ‘ObamaCare’, which will result in 30million Americans gaining access to health insurance.



Although the trust is 70 per cent invested in the US, it warrants its ‘worldwide’ label by the fact that it is also invested in Europe, Asia and emerging markets.



Gavin Haynes, managing director of Bristol-based adviser Whitechurch Securities, believes the long-term potential for investment in healthcare is ‘compelling’ for the simple reason of demographics.



He says: ‘With the average age in the Western world ever increasing, healthcare is likely to remain a long-term growth industry. As people get older, their need of medical products and services increases.’



What he likes about Worldwide Healthcare is OrbiMed’s ‘extensive scientific, medical, finance and operational expertise’.