Paul Chabot, the Republican candidate in the 31st Congressional District race, shakes hands Saturday with volunteers at the Ralph’s parking lot in Rancho Cucamonga before they go knocking on doors campaigning for him. Photo by James Carbone.

San Bernardino County voters have a part Tuesday in deciding who will represent them in offices from governor to Congress to school board, as well as directly deciding policies in some cities.

How many residents take that opportunity is an open question, with projections and conventional wisdom suggesting voter turnout will be near record lows.

But every race has to be decided one way or another — one candidate or the other, yes or no — and the difference between those options is vast in some of those cases.

And some of the races could be decided by just a few voters.

31st Congressional District

National politics hinge to some extent on the seat being vacated by Rep. Gary Miller, R-Rancho Cucamonga, as suggested by recent visits by Democratic heavy-hitters hoping to pick up one of the most competitive seats in the House of Representatives.

On Wednesday, former President Bill Clinton stumped in Oxnard for Redlands Mayor Pete Aguilar, a Democrat, and two other sitting members of Congress. And Saturday saw Vice President Joe Biden in Colton, also advocating a vote for Aguilar.

Biden was at a Get Out the Vote rally attended by hundreds of local Democrats who braved pouring rain to try and get into the high school gymnasium to hear Biden speak and show their support.

Among Aguilar’s supporters who spoke at Saturday’s rally were Rialto Mayor Deborah Robertson, Colton Mayor Sarah Zamora, and Assemblywoman Cheryl Brown, D-San Bernardino. They touted Aguilar’s platform of building a stronger middle class and making a college education more affordable to everyone.

Biden called Aguilar a “son of America who understands what it’s like to work hard and, struggle to get through school. Biden said Aguilar “understands that every single solitary child out there deserves the same chance he (Aguilar) had,” and that the “American people are tired of standing still.”

“Do not let this man lose. We need him,” Biden told the standing-room-only audience. “Get out the vote!”

Conservative supporters of Aguilar’s Republican opponent, Paul Chabot, rented a house across the street from the high school gymnasium to stage a protest. They accused Secret Service agents of parking a U-Haul truck and Budget rental van there so people couldn’t see them protesting.

“It was so low class. I just couldn’t believe it,” said John Berry, a member of the Redlands Tea Party Patriots and California coordinator for the national Tea Party Patriots. “We were peaceably expressing our opinions and exercising free speech and assembly. This is just plain thuggery.”

Advertisement

Aguilar’s supporters were impressed with the speakers at the rally, especially Biden, who told a tender story about how his father felt shame when he couldn’t buy his son a car because he didn’t qualify for a bank loan.

“I was very impressed with Joe Biden’s delivery and the message he was putting out. He’s like a regular guy,” said Frank Martinez, 59, of Colton. “I think he connected with people through the personal stories he was telling about his father.”

Wolff Kirsch, professor of neurosurgery and biochemistry at Loma Linda University Medical Center and a Redlands resident for 25 years, said billions of dollars in proposed cuts by Republicans to medical research and medical care would have a devastating impact on the lives of Americans, especially the elderly.

That’s why he and his wife, Marie-Claire, are supporting Aguilar, who has vowed to save that funding from the chopping block.

But Chabot supporter Jathan Merkel, one of Saturday’s protesters, supports the proposed cuts to the National Institute of Health budget. He is the finance manager at Redlands-based Renovis Surgical Technologies, and since the Affordable Care Act took effect in 2013, he said, the company has lost hundreds of thousands of dollars due to a medical device tag tax of 2.3 percent for every dollar earned.

“It’s costly for us. It’s really painful,” Merkel said Saturday.

He said Chabot has promised to repeal that tax if elected to Congress.

Alex Padilla, Democratic candidate for secretary of state, also appeared on stage with Biden and Aguilar at the rally.

The Republicans’ nominee for lieutenant governor, Ron Nehring, also visited Colton to bring attention to Biden’s gaffes and urge a vote for Aguilar’s opponent, Navy veteran Paul Chabot.

“When campaigning in the nation’s most ethnically diverse state, Joe Biden is quite the choice,” Nehring said in a news release Friday. “One would think they would send him someplace where he hasn’t insulted large numbers of people. Like Canada.”

Chabot, whose campaign has called the Democrats’ visits a sign of desperation and alignment with President Barack Obama’s agenda, also countered with a visit Thursday by Rep. Marsha Blackburn, R-Tennessee.

These get-out-the-vote efforts could make a decisive difference in the tight race.

While many districts essentially are sewed up by one candidate months before the election, a mid-October poll shows Aguilar leading by less than the margin of error — 42 percent to 38 percent, with 17 percent of voters undecided only two weeks before the election.

The poll, commissioned by the conservative American Future Fund Political Action but cited by both candidates, also found that only 57 percent of the electorate knew of both candidates and that Chabot was leading 47-38 among high-propensity voters, according to a memo by American Viewpoint, a Republican survey research firm.

In terms of fundraising, Aguilar has been dominant. As of Sept. 30, campaign finance reports show Aguilar had raised more than $1.79 million since the beginning of the election cycle, compared to $396,307 raised by Chabot.

The candidates have defined themselves in stark opposition to each other, including at a forum hosted by the Redlands Daily Facts, part of the Los Angeles News Group.

On nearly every issue, they presented opposing approaches — Aguilar espousing the mainstream Democratic view and Chabot the mainstream Republican one, although when asked, each had an issue on which they differed from the party line.

The district spans an area from Upland to Redlands.

San Bernardino County Board of Supervisors

As Chabot and Aguilar battle to enter Congress, the representative for the neighboring congressional district and a state Assembly district are leaving their respective legislative roles to fight for a seat on the board of supervisors.

The 4th District seat, which covers Chino, Chino Hills, Ontario, Montclair and Upland, is opening up because Supervisor Gary Ovitt is not seeking another election.

Rep. Gloria Negrete McLeod, D-Chino, is a lifelong county resident and has also served as a state senator and an assemblywoman.

She announced in March that Congress was not the right place for her, after defeating sitting Rep. Joe Baca in 2012.

McLeod said she wants to use her 20 years of experience as a public servant to improve the county, regaining local control of L.A./Ontario International Airport and avoiding public scandals that have plagued the county in the past.

Assemblyman Curt Hagman, R-Chino Hills, and the former mayor of Chino Hills, said he brings valuable experience as both a businessman and elected official. He wants to bolster economic growth in the county, regain local control of ONT and promote more international investment.

While Hagman has out-raised McLeod 4-1 in campaign contributions, McLeod has a more sizeable war chest and strong union support.

Fontana mayor

Meanwhile, the man whom McLeod beat out in 2012 in their bid to represent the entire 35th District is now focusing his sights on a part of it, challenging Fontana’s incumbent mayor.

Joe Baca represented parts of San Bernardino County over a political career that began with election to the state Assembly in 1992 but lost in 2012 after the Census caused redistricting and finished outside of the top two in the spring primary for the 31st Congressional District.

He faces Acquanetta Warren, who was elected the city’s first female and black mayor in 2010 after serving on the City Council since 2002.

In a debate, she said she had seen the city through difficult economic times and had shepherded investments that transformed the city’s reputation.

Baca said his state and federal connections would help him bring in tax breaks and investments, including Legoland.

Warren wants to work closer with Chaffey College to offer more vocational careers for students not planning to attend a university.

She also wants to expand Fontana’s trucking and industrial business areas to be recognized as a national logistics capital.

Luis Vaquera, who has served in leadership roles as a volunteer with the Fontana Unified School District and on the Parks and Community Services, is also running.

Measure Q

In San Bernardino, residents have fiercely debated a proposal to set police and firefighter salaries by collective bargaining, rather than as the average of 10 other cities.

That’s how other cities in the state set public safety pay, and how San Bernardino sets pay for its other employees.

But since 1955 San Bernardino’s charter has had a version of its current formula, Section 186, which in practice sets pay as the average of cities with a population between 100,000 and 250,000.

Measure Q, which is one of five charter changes recommended by a City Council-appointed panel and one of two the council put on Tuesday’s ballot, would change that.

Residents, city officials and police and fire representatives have fiercely debated the proposed change for years, until it was put up for a citizen vote this year.

Proponents say disconnecting San Bernardino wages from the wealthier cities that represent California’s average would give them flexibility as they find themselves in the third year of bankruptcy protection, still without a developed plan to regain solvency. Successive cuts have hit most city services, including police and fire, and officials say their budget-balancing efforts are hamstrung by mandatory raises. For police alone, 186-required adjustments will total $1.3 million in the coming year, the third increase since filing for bankruptcy, City Manager Allen Parker recently said, although in some years it results in a wage decrease.

Opponents say they don’t trust the mayor and council to bargain fairly and warn of an exodus of police and firefighters if the measure passes. Already neither the Police nor Fire Department is fully staffed, while the city’s crime, fire and medical aid requirements remain above average.

Those vacancies contribute to massive overtime, particularly in the Fire Department.

That in turn leads to average total pay that the Yes on Q campaign points to in its mailers and Facebook page — $160,000 for the average San Bernardino firefighter, $40,000 more than the state average.

Measure W

In Claremont, a highly contentious ballot measure could determine the future of the city’s water.

If passed, Measure W would allow the city to borrow up to $135 million in revenue bonds to finance the acquisition of the local water system owned and operated by San Dimas-based Golden State Water Co.

Officials say the move would help stabilize rates and lower water bills, but opponents argue such a move would end up burdening ratepayers.

Golden State Water has spent more than $300,000 on a campaign against the initiative that would help the city purchase the local water system. Meanwhile, a group of residents supporting the measure has spent $30,000.

Staff Writer Joe Nelson contributed to this report.