The ex-Pennsylvania lawmaker said he had received death threats. Murphy hints Giffords shooting tied to ACA vote

Former Democratic Rep. Patrick Murphy suggested in an op-ed that Gabby Giffords was shot because of her vote for Obamacare — an assertion at odds with the story of gunman Jared Loughner, whose deadly rampage in January 2011 in Tucson, Ariz., was never found to have been motivated by a partisan political agenda.

In the piece on MSNBC.com, the ex-Pennsylvania lawmaker, who lost his seat in 2010, said he had received death threats and noted that Giffords had been shot “only months after she voted for the health care law.”

Story Continued Below

“I was one of those members yelled at in town halls and who received death threats and watched on TV when my colleague was shot in the head in January 2011, only months after she voted for the health care law,” Murphy wrote.

( Also on POLITICO: Police photos from Giffords shooting)

“But then I think about why I cast the vote in the first place. I know I’m one of the lucky ones. I came back home from war in one piece,” he added.

Asked to comment on the op-ed, the former lawmaker said he stood by what he wrote and went further to accuse Republicans of “intentionally” stoking fear.

“I stand by the piece that I wrote. I think that there were prominent Republicans who intentionally stoked fear. I thought that their comments were reckless and the violence that many experienced, were the consequences,” Murphy said to POLITICO.

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

Murphy said he includes death threats and bricks thrown through windows as the “violence” he mentioned.

“And I hope in retrospect, the bricks through the windows, death threats, et cetera. I just hope that those prominent Republicans can live, now three years later, with the consequences of their remarks. My conscious is clear, I’m glad I did it,” Murphy said.

Murphy, who continued his support for Obamacare, also criticized the “desperate lies and scare tactics” by the health care law’s critics.

( Also on POLITICO: What the Obamacare fight is really about)

“Unfortunately, the same desperate lies and scare tactics will continue, but the facts surrounding Obamacare are finally coming into focus,” Murphy wrote. “I’m damn proud I stood up and voted for Obamacare. It was the right thing to do, even if it did cost my reelection.”

RNC spokesperson Kirsten Kukowski responded by saying Murphy was focusing on the wrong issue.

“Instead of focusing on mental health issues that played a role in this tragedy, it’s sad Democrats like Patrick Murphy are trying to use it to score political points.”

Giffords could not immediately be reached for comment.