Nina Bustamante, 9, picked the Reese's Peanut Butter Cup as her favorite candy. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

With Halloween less than a week away, kids are already dreaming of the candy that will fill up their pumpkin buckets and pillow cases Friday night.

But not every piece of candy triggers a happy dance for the trick or treaters.

According to kids Favorite candy: Twix Most controversial: Candy Corn Least familiar: Heath bar Least favorite: Smarties

We asked eight local kids ages 4 through 10 to rate some of the most popular Halloween candy. Each child received Candy Corns, M&Ms, Snickers, Heath Bars, Dots, Tootsie Rolls, Smarties, Reese's Peanut Butter Cups, Twix, Tootsie Pops, Kit Kats, Reese's Pieces and Milk Duds. Here is what we found.

And the winner is...

Twix was the most popular in first place for Gabriel Vahlenkamp, 6, Ryleigh Bunn, 7, and Carl Vanden Berg, 8, who wore an "army guy" costume to the tasting. The candy bar ranked high for most of the kids and was one of the first to disappear from the stash of leftovers.

"Twix is the best," Carl mumbled with a full mouth while holding up his empty Twix wrapper. "Do you have more?"

The Heath bar was new for many tasters, which pushed it to the bottom of the rankings for most of the kids. But Carl's brother, Andy, 6, discovered a new favorite in the chocolate toffee mixture.

Carl and Andy's younger brother Ray, 4, who was dressed as Captain American, spent the entire tasting nursing a red Tootsie Pop under the table. All of the kids searched the community candy pile for the right color and flavor of sucker but no one chose it as their favorite or least favorite candy. It fell somewhere in the middle with Milk Duds, which were unfamiliar to a few tasters, Kit Kats, Snickers, Tootsie Rolls and Reese's Pieces.

Ryleigh Bunn, 7, chose Twix as her favorite candy. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Andy, who wore a Stormtrooper costume with a talking helmet during the tasting, said he likes to mix candies that aren't at the top of his list, like Tootsie Rolls and Tootsie Pops.

"I put a Tootsie Roll on my sucker, so I don't have to wait until the end" Andy said.

Controversial Candy Corn

Candy Corn was the most controversial of the candies distributed.

The oldest taster, Brooklyn Young, 10, chose them as her favorite candy, but said she does not get many on Halloween, probably because they aren't individually wrapped.

Austin Mcfarlin, 5, Nina Bustamonte, 9, and Andy chose Candy Corns as their least favorite item.

Gabriel Vahlenkamp, 6, says his favorite candies are the candy pumpkin and Twix candy bar. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Ryleigh and her cousin, Austin, ranked a larger pumpkin-shaped Candy Corn high on their list, but bumped the traditional three-color, corn-shaped candy much lower.

"My grandma always has the pumpkin ones at her house in a bowl," Ryleigh said. "They taste different because they're bigger and sweeter."

Smarties, not the smart choice

Smarties were the least favorite of the group with three kids putting it at the bottom of the rankings and the rest putting it very low on their lists.

"Blech," Brooklyn said when asked what she thought of them. "They're weird."

Unfortunately, the kids said they often end up with a lot of smarties. The adult chaperones laughed and predicted that the affordability of the tart candy was to blame.

Austin McFarlin, 5, chose Dots as his favorite candy. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Ray was too distracted by the Tootsie Pop that was nearly half eaten now to choose a least favorite. But one thing is for sure, it's not the red sucker that was smeared across his face.

The ritual

Since the kids know that their bags will include a mixture of their favorite and least favorite treats, they have a system.

Most said they dump the bag on the floor when they get home giving them — and mom and dad who usually look over the treats for any open packages — a better look at the goods.

Some organize the candy, like Gabriel who said he creates piles for each candy to inventory the stash and determine which ones he will save for last.

Brooklyn Young, 10, picked candy corns as her favorite candy. (Lewis Geyer /Longmont Times-Call)

Carl and Andy don't waist any time sorting their candy before they hide their bags under their beds from mom and dad and each other.

Ray just smiles showing off his red and now slightly chocolate-y teeth when I ask if he hides his candy.

Happy on Halloween

No matter what ends up in their bags, the kids said they can find ways to get more of the candy they like by trading away the candies they don't.

Ryleigh traded her Reese's Cup for Gabriel's Heath bar.

Gabriel gave up half of his Milk Duds for Austin's Candy Corns.

Trades continued throughout the tasting and everyone seemed happy when they left with their bag full of goodies.

Overall, the kids were grateful for any candy and the chance to get dressed up like their favorite characters.

"I just love candy," Andy screamed tossing a handful of candy in the air. "Halloween is the best."

Under the table below, Ray pulls the sucker out of his mouth for the first time since he arrived, looks up at his brother and smiles.

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com