Howard Weiss and Sara Pescatello

September 22, 2014

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) evaluates Medicare Advantage (MA) health plan performance through a five Star Rating System. A close analysis of the Star System finds compelling evidence that organizations focusing on low-income individuals encounter systematic challenges due to the characteristics of the populations they serve.

These challenges result in lower ratings in the Star System, even for MA plans that are effectively serving low-income beneficiaries, threatening the viability of these plans and endangering the health of the most vulnerable. Starting in 2012, pursuant to provisions in the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA), performance on the Star System also affects plan viability due to new payment incentives provided by the law for high performance.

We looked at trends in the Star Ratings from 2011-2014 and individual measure scores for each MA health plan contract to determine if plans focusing on low-income populations (contracts with 50 percent or more Dual Eligible Special Needs (D-SNP) enrollment or 50 percent or more of Part D Low Income Subsidy (LIS) eligible individuals) and the beneficiaries they serve are adversely affected by the Star Ratings System.

Dual eligible beneficiaries are individuals who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medicaid. Beneficiaries who qualify for the Part D Low-Income Subsidy are individuals with incomes below 150 percent of the Federal Poverty Level (FPL).

Low-income populations are more likely to have complex medical needs that benefit from the care coordination and disease management MA plans provide. For example, 55 percent of all dual eligibles have three or more chronic conditions, 58 percent have cognitive impairments, and 54 percent need help with Activities of Daily Living. These beneficiaries are responsible for a disproportionate share of Medicare expenditures, consisting of 15 percent of the Medicare population, but approximately 40 percent of total costs.

The methodology and results of our analysis are given in detail below.

These key findings have significant implications for plans that focus on low-income populations:

Large differences in performance on the Star System between plans that focus on low-income populations and other plans are evident at the individual measure level across time.

While average Overall Star Ratings are improving for all plans, the disparity between MA plans that focus on low-income populations and other plans is growing due to the unique challenges they face.

Plan contracts that focus on low-income populations significantly underperform on the Star System compared to contracts with low enrollment of these beneficiaries.

How Should Policymakers Respond?

Over 1.6 million Medicare beneficiaries currently receive care from D-SNPs and numerous low-income individuals are enrolled in other MA plans. The issues raised here and below have a direct impact on these beneficiaries, and the results detailed in our analysis below indicate that organizations focusing on dual eligibles and other low-income beneficiaries – who are more likely to have multiple chronic diseases, cognitive impairments, or need help with Activities of Daily Living — face unique challenges to achieving high performance on the Star Ratings System.

Changes are necessary to avoid disruption for the very beneficiaries who stand to benefit most from the prevention and disease management offered by MA plans. Recommendations to improve the Star System and prevent this disruption include:

Ensuring emphasis on improvement in the Star System to appropriately reward efforts by plans that focus on low income populations to achieve better results for beneficiaries and to recognize plan achievements in health disparities;

Researching and evaluating strategies to appropriately use case mix adjustment to accurately reflect the challenges of serving vulnerable populations;

Reverse the agency’s decision to no longer determine prior to the measurement year the raw scores necessary to achieve a 4-Star rating. Providing this information would help MA plans to work effectively and efficiently toward well-defined goals and ensure beneficiaries receive high quality care;

Other mechanisms such as providing a longer phase-in period for triple weighted outcomes measures to allow sufficient time for plans to develop tools and techniques to address the unique needs of low-income populations and address the observed disparity in plan performance. Currently, outcomes measures within the star system are weighted three times as much as process measures.

Analysis: MA Plans Focusing on Low-Income Populations

Methodology

The methodology uses 2011-2014 Star Ratings published on the CMS Part C and Part D Performance Data webpage. Star Ratings averages calculated in this analysis are not enrollment weighted. All contracts during each plan year were assessed for enrollment of low-income populations using CMS D-SNP and LIS enrollment data from 2011-2014.

This analysis uses two variables to assess the performance of low-income focused plans in the Star Ratings System:

Percentage of enrollment in an MA contract that are enrolled in D-SNPs. MA contracts with 50 percent or more of enrollment in Dual Eligible Special Needs Plans are classified as “High D-SNP contracts.”

Percentage of enrollment of individuals who are eligible for LIS. Contracts with 50 percent or more LIS individuals are classified as “High LIS contracts.”

The D-SNP analysis compared performance of High D-SNP with contracts with 0 percent D-SNP enrollment. The LIS analysis compared performance of High D-SNP contracts with contracts with 1-25 percent LIS enrollment because less than 5 percent of all contracts have no LIS beneficiaries for all years evaluated. Cost plans were not included in the analysis.

The chart below details the number of contracts and the percentage of enrollment in each category included in the analysis for 2014. In 2011-2014 there was some variation in the number of contracts and the percentage of all MA enrollees included in each category.

The number of High D-SNP Contracts has ranged from 70 in 2011 to a high of 126 in 2013 before declining to 90 in 2014. The number of High LIS Contracts has ranged from a high of 156 in 2012 to 144 in 2013 before declining to 135 in 2014 (see Exhibit 1, which is based on analysis of September 2013 CMS MA enrollment data).

Analysis: Overall Star Ratings

The average score for MA plan contracts that enroll a high percentage of low-income beneficiaries is significantly below (0.50 Stars) contracts that do not focus on this population (see Exhibit 2 and 3). This half-star difference is significant given the implications on the long-term viability of organizations focusing on low-income populations.

Differences are also observed in over a four year period. Significantly, while average Overall Star Ratings are improving for all plans, the disparity between contracts that focus on low income populations is 61 percent higher in 2014 than 2011 when analyzing the D-SNP variable and 29 percent higher in 2014 than 2011 when analyzing the LIS variable (see Exhibit 4 and 5).

These results are consistent with findings from a recent study demonstrating a half-star difference in performance for contracts with more than 50 percent of enrollment in D-SNPs compared to those with less than 10 percent in these plans.

Analysis: Individual Measures

An analysis of performance on individual measures demonstrates there are many more measures on which plans focusing on low-income populations significantly underperform, as compared to those on which they outperform, contracts without this focus. For example, in 2014, there were 11 measures on which High D-SNP contracts underperformed 0 percent D-SNP contracts by at least 1 Star and four measures on which High LIS contracts underperformed Low LIS Contracts by at least 1 Star (see Exhibit 6).

Two of these measures are present in each analysis – Care Coordination and Medication Adherence for Hypertension. This contrasts with only one measure, Reducing the Risk of Falling, on which High D-SNP Contracts and High LIS Contracts outperformed plans that do not focus on low-income populations by at least 1 Star.

These findings generally persist through time and across measure type. This discrepancy is most pervasive for HEDIS and CAHPS measures (see Exhibit 7), although low-income focused contracts have outperformed in the HEDIS/HOS category, which consists of only three measures. The underperformance by contracts focusing on low-income populations on HEDIS and survey-based CAHPS measures, which make up over half of the 2014 Star Ratings, further highlights the challenges faced by these plans.

Illustrative Examples

The disparity in performance between contracts that focus on low-income beneficiaries and other plans is clearly exemplified in an analysis of two categories of measures: Medication Adherence measures and SNP-specific measures.

Medication Adherence

Medication adherence measures are examples of measures on which contracts that focus on low-income populations significantly underperform compared to contracts with low enrollment of these beneficiaries. Prior research has shown medication adherence is highly dependent on a combination of factors outside health plans’ control such as education, socioeconomic status, and health status.

In 2012, CMS incorporated three new medication adherence measures into the Star System. These measures were weighted the same as process measures in 2012 and three times as much as process measures in 2013 and 2014 (see Exhibit 8 and 9).

As demonstrated above, the average Star Rating for all plans increased by approximately one-half star on all three measures from 2013 to 2014. While all contracts show similar levels in growth of year-to-year improvement on all three measures, contracts enrolling a high percentage of low-income beneficiaries underperformed contracts without this focus by approximately 1 star for 2013 and 2014 on all three measures. These findings also highlight challenges faced by low-income focused contracts when relatively new measures are triple-weighted shortly after introduction into the Star System.

SNP-Only Measures

CMS first established SNP-specific measures in 2012. MA contracts with enrollment in all SNP types, including D-SNPs, Chronic SNPs, and Institutional SNPs report on these measures. Findings on the three measures that have been in the measure set in 2013 and 2014 are presented below.

Generally, the results show continued improvement among Chronic-SNPs and Institutional-SNPs (see results for 0 percent D-SNP enrollment in Exhibit 10) that has not been mirrored by D-SNP focused contracts. These findings show that D-SNP contracts underperform other SNPs that do not focus on low-income populations.

Exhibit 1

Exhibit 2

Exhibit 3

Exhibit 4

Exhibit 5

Exhibit 6

Exhibit 7

Exhibit 8

Exhibit 9

Exhibit 10