It must be noted that some of their departures were unrelated to Obamacare, however

The Democratic-controlled Senate passed President Obama's healthcare law with a filibuster-proof 60-vote majority on Christmas Eve of 2009. "Health care reform" proved to be a very unpopular measure. The backlash drove Republicans to control the House the following year. Following this week's elections, 25 senators who voted for Obamacare are already out -- or not going be part of the new Senate in January.

After results are in from the Senate runoff in Louisiana, Mary Landrieu is also expected to depart. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 11/7/2014 (1 year ago) Published in Politics & Policy Keywords: Senators, Obamacare, departing

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - Not all of the turnover in the chamber is attributable to Obamacare. While many senators voted for Obamacare and lost re-election battles due to their support for the law and other Democrats retired given their support for the law, there were exceptions. John Kerry left his seat to become secretary of state and Robert Byrd passed away, for example.



It must also be noted that some outgoing pro-Obamacare votes were replaced by new Democratic senators.



Combat corruption with moral education; send a Bible to a child, or another person in need.





At least Hawaiian Senator Dan Inouye didn't get voted out of office on account of his support of Obamacare: he passed away in 2012.

Lost and replaced by a Republican:

Fifteen Senators who voted for Obamacare either failed to win reelection or declined to run for reelection and had their seats turned over to Republicans. After results are in from the Senate runoff in Louisiana, Mary Landrieu is also expected to depart.The following is a breakdown of senators who have voted for Obamacare who will not be part of the next Senate.Sen. Mark Begich, D-Alaska -- lost to Dan Sullivan, RSen. Mark Pryor, D-Ark. -- lost to Rep. Tom Cotton, R-Ark.Sen. Mark Udall, D-Colo. -- lost to Rep. Cory Gardner, R- Colo.Sen. Kay Hagan, D-N.C. -- lost to Thom Tillis, RRuss Feingold, D-Wis.Blanche Lincoln, D-Ark.Arlen Specter, D-Penn.Left Senate and replaced by a Republican:Jay Rockefeller, D-W.V.Max Baucus, D-Mont.Tim Johnson, D-S.D.Tom Harkin, D-IowaBen Nelson, D-Neb.Byron Dorgan, D-N.D.Evan Bayh, D-Ind.Roland Burris, D-Ill.Left Senate and replaced by a Democrat:Jim Webb, D-Va.Joe Lieberman, I-Conn.Herb Kohl, D-Wis.Daniel Akaka, D-HawaiiJeff Bingaman, D-N.M.Chris Dodd, D-Conn.Paul Kirk, D-Mass. (appointed to replace Ted Kennedy -- seat later held by Republican Scott Brown)John Kerry, D-Mass.Ted Kauffman, D-Del.Kent Conrad, D-N.D.Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich.Died in office:Robert Byrd, D-W.VDaniel Inouye, D-HawaiiFrank Lautenberg, D- N.JVulnerable pro-Obamacare Democrats still at risk in 2014:Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.