The new gondola at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park takes riders 2,400 feet across the gorge, and 1,200 above the Arkansas River. ( Peggy Gair / Royal Gorge Bridge & Park )

Andy Soles of Parma, Mich., rides the Zip Rider at the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park on Tuesday. The Zip Rider is the highest zip line in North America, taking riders 2,400 feet across the gorge, and 1,200 above the Arkansas River (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Helpful Info The Royal Gorge Bridge & Park is open from 7 a.m. to dusk, 365 days a year, weather permitting. General admission from May 23 through Oct. 2 is $23 for adults; $20 for seniors 60 and older; and $17 for children ages 4-11. Tickets may be validated for free next day admission, and group rates are available for groups of 20 or more by calling (888) 333-5597. For more information, visit www.royalgorgebridge.com.

New attractions, a new season and new amenities, but the same breathtaking view awaits visitors to the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park.

The park reopened to the public in August 2014 after the Royal Gorge Fire swept through and destroyed 90 percent of its structures and attractions June 11, 2013.

The bridge itself, however, was unscathed.

A grand opening celebration will kickoff May 8, with activities and live music running throughout the weekend, including special shows by magician Christian Augustine and aerial performer April Vollm. Their show will run daily from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend.

Opening just in time for this year's busy tourist season is the new Zip Rider, the highest zip line in North America. It takes riders 2,400 feet across the gorge, and 1,200 above the Arkansas River, reaching speeds up to 40 miles per hour. The ride across the gorge is between 45 and 50 seconds.

"I've been on it several times," said Mike Bandera, general manager of the Royal Gorge Bridge & Park. "It is a beautiful ride — it's smooth and it allows time to look around the gorge."

Advertisement

Cost to ride the Zip Rider is $40 per person. Riders must weigh between 100 and 255 pounds and be between 48" and 82" tall.

Andy Soles, and Jennifer Soles, 17, Parma, Mich., rode the Zip Ride on Tuesday. They enjoyed the view and said they definitely would do it again.

"There was no way I was going to go (initially)," Andy said. But once the ride started, his fears subsided.

The Gondola ride replaces the aerial tram that was destroyed in the fire. Each gondola seats eight people and is encased in glass to allow riders a full panoramic view. Six cars cross over the bridge at one time. This ride is handicap accessible

"It's moving up from a two-star gondola to a five-star gondola," Bandera said.

The Gondola ride is included in the general admission price.

Riders will soar through the air, more than 1,200 feet above the Arkansas River, while riding the Royal Rush Skycoaster. One to three harnessed people may ride at a time, but riders must be at least 46" tall. Riders can reach up to speeds of 50 mph.

Cost is $25 for one rider; $45 for two riders; and $60 for three riders.

The new children's playland is slated to open the end of April. It will include a playground, climbing structure, water feature, maze, wax hand station and carousel.

Attractions included in the general admission price are the miniature train, the Plaza Theater & Historical Expo, Café 1230, the new state-of-the-art visitor center, the waterclock, the new children's playland and, of course, the bridge.

The month of May is Fremont County Appreciation Month. Day passes and season passes for Fremont County residents are half price when purchased in May.

The Royal Gorge Bridge & Park is located at 4218 CR 3A, about 13 miles west of Canon City. To learn more about features and attractions, or to purchase discounted tickets online, visit www.royalgorgebridge.com.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com