The memorial will be located next to the flood memorial of 1976

A bronze heart sculpture, created in honor of flood victims Evelyn Starner and Patty Goodwine, rests near completion at Bronze Services on Friday. The sculpture will be inscribed and placed in late July on a stone pedestal in the Big Thompson Canyon. ( Luke Whittaker / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

After the 1976 Big Thompson River flood, it took 25 years to place a permanent memorial in the canyon for the 144 people who lost their lives there.

Organizers of that memorial and the ceremony that's held each year beside it say that they don't want to wait another 25 years to honor the victims of the 2013 flood.

"The memorial is just a part of making it so they're never forgotten," said Barb Anderson, who serves on the board of the nonprofit that was established to raise funds to maintain the 1976 memorial and provide scholarships for descendants of the flood victims.

Anderson is a Cedar Cove resident, as were 79-year-old Evelyn Starner and 60-year-old Patty Goodwine, the two women who died in the September flood.

Anderson said she was glad that there were only two deaths, "but two is still too many."

Board members of Big Thompson Flood Memorial Inc. have begun to accept donations for a memorial for Starner and Goodwine in the canyon. It will be separate from the 1976 bronze memorial, but located alongside of it near the Big Thompson Canyon Volunteer Fire Department.

Loveland artist George Walbye has designed the bronze heart that will be inscribed with a dedication to Starner and Goodwine.

"I'm very pleased to be doing something for this terrible tragedy," Walbye said. "I'm flattered that they asked me."

Kit Kittinger, who did the stone work around the 1976 memorial, has also come on board, said Anderson, who has been gathering rocks from Cedar Cove for the stone pedestal where the heart will be placed.

Advertisement

The memorial is expected to be dedicated during the annual 1976 Flood Remembrance Service that will be held at 7 p.m. on July 31, one mile below Drake.

Anderson said they hope to raise at least $2,000 for the memorial.

If more than the cost of the memorial is donated, Anderson said the money will be split between the two families.

"This is also for the families to have somewhere to go," Anderson said. "Yes, they have the cemetery, but this is a part of who these two ladies were. They loved the canyon, obviously, otherwise they wouldn't have been living here."

To make a tax deductible donation to the memorial for Starner and Goodwine, mail checks to Big Thompson Flood Memorial, PO Box 144, Drake, CO, 80515. Checks may be made to the "Big Thompson Canyon Flood Memorial" with "For Evelyn and Patty" in the subject line.

For more information, contact Anderson at 970-667-6465.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Jessica Maher at 970-669-5050 ext. 516 or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/JessicaMaherRH.