The Pasadena City Council gathered for a special meeting to consider a new ambulance program Tuesday (July 21).

Currently, the City of Pasadena contracts with two different EMS companies for ambulance services. The Clear Lake Emergency Medical Corp (CLEMC) serves the south end of Pasadena and the Tyler-based company East Texas Medical Center (ETMC) serves the area north of Underwood Street.

Both companies bill patients for ambulance services and both receive a subsidy from the city to help cover costs brought on by uninsured or underinsured patients who do not pay.

Under the new proposal, the city would part with CLEMC and have only one ambulance service.

Vice President of ETMC Ron Schwartz met with the council and outlined the new plan, which he said was needed to offset decreasing revenues caused by rising personnel costs and healthcare reforms.

“We have been seeing an increase in call volume. We think that is due to healthcare reform because many people have lost their health insurance over the last couple of years,” Schwartz said. “We’ve seen a huge percentage of people drop to no insurance and then it makes it difficult to access healthcare.

“So what they do is dial 911 to access healthcare. Many people have figured out, that if you dial 911, you are never refused service,” he said.

Monthly water bill fee proposed

Under the new proposal, residents would be billed $4 a month on their water bill as part of an EMS service subscription. In return, those with insurance would bear no out-of-pocket expenses and those without insurance would be given a 50 percent discount on the standard rate. Residents would be automatically enrolled in the program but would be able to opt out.

Of the city’s 50,674 water customers, ETMC officials anticipate revenues of roughly $1.8 million if approximately 74 percent of the city’s 50,674 water customers participate in the program.

Under the proposed terms of the plan, the City of Pasadena would keep any revenues above $1.8 million, Schwartz said.

Increased costs due to competition for trained medical personnel was another reason ETMC officials proposed the water bill subscription plan.

“Right now, there’s a critical shortage of paramedics and EMTs in this area and a lot of it we believe is due to the workload and the schedule we operate with today,” Schwartz told the council.

ETMC paramedics and EMTs currently work alternating 24-hour shifts. The new proposal would allow the company to move to rotating 12-hour shifts.

Salaries and signing bonuses are another factor. ETMC offers paramedics a $7,500 signing bonus. However, a rival company recently began offering a $10,000 signing bonus, Schwartz said, making even more difficult to attract and retain trained workers.

“Paramedics are leaving us and going to work for companies that pay four or five dollars more,” he said.

The increased revenues from the water bill subscription proposal would allow the company to invest in equipment, increase salaries to be more competitive and be able to transition paramedics and EMTS away from 24 hour shifts to 12 hour rotating shifts. The salary for paramedics would go from approximately $13 an-hour to roughly $19 an-hour and EMT’s salaries would increase from roughly $8 an-hour to $12 an-hour.

Councilmember Sammy Casados asked if the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, would increase the number of people with insurance.

“Do you foresee the people who don’t have insurance having to purchase policies because of the fees?” he asked.

“That’s what people believe, but to be honest with you we’ve not experienced that yet because the penalties for not having it are pretty miniscule,” Schwartz said. “But that was the plan. President Obama was convinced everybody was going to have insurance. But, we’ve not seen everybody get insurance. We’ve seen people shift from commercial or third-party insurance to Medicaid in some cases and then some people lost their insurance. You would have thought that, and that’s why the government went down this trail, they thought the cost of insurance would go down. That’s how they sold it to everybody. But, it hasn’t happened that way.”

The council took no action on the proposed measure.