<p>Florida Gov. Rick Scott delivers his state of the state speech on the opening day to a joint session of the legislature on Tuesday, March 3, 2015, in Tallahassee, Fla.(AP Photo/Steve Cannon)</p>

By Jenna Buzzacco-Foerster of the Naples Daily News

Gov. Rick Scott approved a $78 billion state budget Tuesday, but not before stripping out $461 million and hundreds of local projects like money for Collier County’s accelerator project to help local businesses.

In a letter accompanying the budget he signed for the fiscal year that begins July 1, the Naples Republican said the state was committed to spending tax dollars “by investing in areas with proven results.”

The budget includes $19.7 billion for public school education; $9.3 billion for statewide transportation projects; and $4.8 billion for public safety. It also includes money for land purchases, Everglades’ restoration and spring restoration.

Collier County will see about $364.5 million for public school education, or $8,022 per student. Lee County will see about $656.5 million next year, or $7,284 per student. Collier County school board member Erika Donalds said the boost in education spending was a “step in the right direction.

“I think that having less funding forces school districts into a one size fits all approach, and more funding gives local districts more flexibility to provide more resources,” she said.

The budget sets aside $1.5 million for beach renourishment along Collier beaches and $500,000 for a renourishment project in Bonita Springs. There is also $6.8 million for an access road at Florida Gulf Coast University.

That road project was a top priority for FGCU, said Wilson Bradshaw, the university’s president. The south access road will create an additional campus evacuation route, increase the number of entry points for first responders and provide direct access to on-campus student housing.

“It’s been a good session for us,” he said.

But it was the money that Scott yanked out of the budget passed by lawmakers last week that drew the most attention after he signed it Tuesday.

Several of Southwest Florida local projects were fully funded, but others fell victim to the governor’s veto pen.

Bonita Springs requested $200,000 for bicycle and pedestrian improvements on Terry Street, but that request didn’t survive.

“That was unfortunate,” said Mayor Ben Nelson. “That was something that was really to serve the surrounding community.”

Perhaps the most shocking local veto was not one for new dollars, but a request to rollover money Collier County received for its accelerators to next year.

“To say I am disappointed in the governor is a tremendous understatement,” said Sen. Garrett Richter, R-Naples.

In 2014, Scott OK’d a $2.5 million budget request for the Collier County soft-landing accelerator projects. The money was good for one year, but Richter said project was delayed as county officials worked out a contract with the Department of Economic Opportunity.

“The whole point of this request is that everything got kicked back six months,” said County Manager Leo Ochs. “The (Department of Economic Opportunity) was fine with pushing things back. The Legislature was fine with it. But for some unknown reason the governor’s office put it on the hit list.”

Ochs said a significant amount of the original $2.5 million grant is at risk; and it is unlikely that at least half of the project, a culinary-based accelerator in Immokalee, will be built.

Richter was among the lawmakers who pushed for the unspent money — about $1.7 million, according to a DEO spokeswoman — to roll over to next year. He was also among the lawmakers who supported the state Senate’s efforts to expand health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act, at one point traveling to Washington, D.C., to meet with federal officials.

“Seemingly there has been a price to pay for state senators who did not follow along with (Scott’s) late hearted change with how to fund health care in the state of Florida,” said Keith Arnold, a lobbyist for Collier County. “It seems as if the veto pen points very heavily in the direction of retribution who did not heed his call. From my standpoint, this is politics at its worst.”

Lawmakers were unable to reach a deal during the regular session that ended in late April because of a divide over health care spending.

On Tuesday, the Obama administration and the state announced an agreement to continue funding the hospital low-income pool for two more years, with $1 billion this year, which is about half the current amount, and $600 million for the next.

__The Associated Press, Tampa Tribune reporter James L. Rosica and Naples Daily News reporters Liz Freeman and Greg Stanley contributed to this report.