WESTMINSTER — The word of the day was “beautiful” as thousands of people explored the new St. Anthony North Health Campus on Saturday.

“It’s beautiful, just lovely,” said Carol Hicks, who lives nearby and was one of more than 4,000 people attending the grand opening. “Clearly a lot of thought and planning went into this. It’s breathtaking.”

The 350,000-square-foot facility is home to more than 500 pieces of artwork, including 23 pieces created specifically for the hospital by Colorado artists.

Floor-to-ceiling windows allow natural light to stream in and offer views of the Rocky Mountains. Wood floors, colorful wallpaper and natural stone make many areas feel more like a resort or a spa than a hospital.

“Art is very much a part of our healing and our happiness,” said artist Mardie Rees, who is creating a 7-foot sculpture of St. Anthony to be placed in the atrium later this year.

“It’s just amazing,” she said of the new facility.

“I love that they incorporated a lot of color, that there’s different art in every section. And they’ve done a good job of bringing the outdoors inside,” she added, referencing the aspen groves in the atrium.

The new campus, sponsored by Catholic Health Initiatives, is part of regional health care network Centura Health.

Located at West 144th Avenue and Interstate 25, the $177 million facility houses 92 inpatient rooms, including a 20-room intensive care unit, a 12-room birthing center and a 24-hour emergency room.

The health campus also includes a pharmacy, wellness classes, drop-in child care and three gardens focused on community, healing and prayer.

“What sets our campus apart is a focus on the continuum of health and wellness,” CEO Carole Peet said.

“We want to take care of people across mind, body and spirit.”

In addition to hospital services, the facility contains the Orchard Neighborhood Health Center, featuring more than 50 primary and specialty care medical practices. Touch-screen directories near the elevators allow patients to easily find their appointments, check out the cafeteria specials or take a virtual-art tour.

On Tuesday, hospital staff members will transport roughly 60 patients from the old St. Anthony North Hospital on West 84th Avenue to the new health campus. The 44-year-old hospital will remain open as the 84th Avenue Neighborhood Health Center with a 24-hour emergency room and outpatient services.

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com