Time Collaborative helps Lafayette schools redesign their schedules

About 200 Angevine Middle School students are getting to school extra early, at 7:45 a.m., this year to take classes that give them extra support or enrichment.

There's a session to help kids who are trying tougher classes, a book club, a film class, math classes for both support and enrichment, and jazz band or orchestra. Forty fifth-graders from area elementary schools also take an early-morning, middle school-level math class at Angevine. After school, there's a variety of sports and clubs.

The combination of before- and after-school offerings gives Angevine's 600 students the option to spend eight hours at school, for an extended day that school leaders hope will lead to higher achievement and more student engagement.

Along with more time, the school is making changes to better use its regular class time.

"Schools have not changed significantly in the last 100 years," said Angevine Principal Mike Medina. "We have the same schedule, with three months off in the summer and everything packaged into a six-and-a-half-hour day. Kids go from one subject to the next, and it's not connected. The overall objective for us is to have less fragmentation in our school day and greater opportunities for kids to learn."

Angevine redesigned its schedule with the help of the Time Collaborative, a pilot launched in 2012 to develop expanded learning time programs at schools in five states. The initiative is led by the National Center on Time and Learning and supported in Colorado by the state Department of Education and the Legacy Foundation.

"We've seen again and again that more time can lead to better achievement and deeper engagement," said Ben Lummis, the National Center on Time and Learning's vice president. "Our fundamental question is how to get more schools, more communities, more students and teachers to benefit from that."

He said participating schools receive intensive support in redesigning their school day, including case studies of what's worked in other schools across the country and scheduling, budgeting and resource allocation help.

Mackenzie Kilday, left, writes a question about mold on the board while Adriana Iturbe, middle left, Olivia Kohnken, middle right, and Allen Perezin, right, take notes in Liz Barcheck's "advancement via individual determination" class at Angevine Middle School in Lafayette earlier this month. (MARK LEFFINGWELL)

Ten Colorado schools, including four in Lafayette, initially were chosen to work with the Time Collaborative. They spent last school year exploring ideas and working with parents and community members to create an ideal school day.

Four of those schools, including Lafayette's Angevine and Pioneer Elementary, were chosen to move forward this school year to test out their ideas. Boulder's University Hill Elementary also is participating in the planning stage this school year, while Broomfield's Emerald Elementary has expressed interest in the pilot in future years.

The Boulder Valley schools' agreement with the Time Collaborative was that the changes would need to be made without spending any money.

Old structure 'handcuffs' educators

Angevine's Medina said the draw of the Time Collaborative was its promise of innovation.

"We've created a structure in education that really handcuffs us in a lot of ways," he said. "There are teacher contracts, transportation issues, no additional resources. When we try to be creative, we feel like we can't do it."

To make the before-school classes work without hiring more teachers, six Angevine teachers agreed to start their day earlier. Teachers, once a week on late-start days, also spend an hour learning how best to incorporate technology into lessons and another hour collaborating in grade-level teams. The school also shortened its passing periods to gain a little extra time.

"There are a lot of pieces that we're looking at," Medina said. "It's not that kids have to do more, but that we have more quality learning during the day."

The early-morning teachers said the small class sizes allow them to try new things and go slower or go into more depth, depending on what the students need. Plus, they said, students are motivated and want to be there.

"The students all have this really good experience to start their day," said JoDee Rose, who teaches a class modeled after a book club for students who love to read.

Larry Peters, who teaches a morning math support class, said students keep asking if they can join after hearing from friends that it's helping them in math. His class goes over the same concepts they're learning in their regular math classes, he said, giving them a head start.

Josh Gruba holds up a dry-erase board with his equation answer in Karen Gullicksrud's fifth-grade math enrichment class at Angevine Middle School. ( MARK LEFFINGWELL )

"It builds their confidence," he said. "They know they can do the work."

Eighth-grader Bryanna Whitehead, who's taking his morning class, said she got a C on her second quiz of the year in math.

"I was really hoping for at least a B, so I started coming to this class," she said. "I want to get an A."

She said she likes that the early class "gets my brain moving," making it easier to be ready to learn when the regular school day starts. Plus, she said, it's helpful because "we can take as long or as short a time as I need to learn something."

Pioneer adds 'personal learning time'

Lafayette's Pioneer Elementary, instead of adding extra classes at the start of the day, moved the time school gets out from 2:35 p.m. to 3:20 p.m. The extra time allows for longer blocks of math and literacy, plus a block for "personal learning time." That block is when students can get extra help or explore a topic that interests them.

"We're always saying, 'If we just had a little more time,'" said Principal Kristin Nelson-Steinhoff. "Now, we do."

She said the dual-immersion bilingual school started with priorities that include more core instruction time. Adding personal learning time, she said, allowed the school to move literacy and other interventions for struggling students out of core instruction time and increase student engagement.

In years past, she said, students usually listed recess, lunch or physical education as their favorite part of the day. Now, she aid, she's hearing more switch that answer to personal learning time.

"For the first time in my career, kids are pointing to those academics because they're exciting and meaningful to them," she said.

In the first six-week personal learning time session, students picked a "passion project" to research and then presented what they learned to the rest of the class. In a fifth-grade class, student topics included the world's highest peaks and favorite football players. To present, they made videos, PowerPoints and posters.

"It's awesome," fifth-grader Corrine Carlson said. "We get to learn about things that we're interested in. We have lots of different choices."

Pioneer's new schedule also includes a daily, 80-minute block that's used for art, music, physical education, technology and library time -- giving classroom teachers time to collaborate. To make the longer day happen, teachers agreed to move their prep and collaboration time inside the regular school day instead of before and after school.

"I really commend our staff and teachers for being able to look outside the box and try something new," Nelson-Steinhoff said. "It's really going to pay off for our students."

Expansion of program would require more money

At both Pioneer and Angevine, school leaders said that if they decide to expand the extended-day program, they likely would need more resources.

Pioneer's Nelson-Steinhoff said she's working this year on partnering with community organizations to add an after-school component to extend the day even longer -- a successful strategy used by Sanchez, another elementary school in Lafayette.

At Sanchez, students participate in after-school enrichment activities that range from hip-hop dance to intensive, small-group work with literacy specialists. Homework help from tutors is another option.

Enrichment activities are provided by volunteers and community partner organizations and paid for through a federal 21st Century Learning grant. The school also added time by setting up a staggered start for literacy and English-as-a-second-language teachers, allowing some to start later and stay later.

At Angevine, Assistant Principal Amanda Holden said, the early-morning classes are full. To add more, the school would need money to hire more teachers and to add bus service for students who don't live in walking distance and don't have parents who can drive them.

"We really want to reach out to all kids," she said.