By

After 19 years in the real estate business, Kathleen Davis of the Powers Realty Group has come to appreciate and respect her accumulated experience and the lessons she’s learned while serving her clients. “I have spent nearly two decades at the top of my field and have experienced pretty much every possible scenario in selling and buying homes. My experience helped me become the number one agent at Powers Realty Group in 2014,” Davis said during this edited interview.

What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

Achieving the goals of my sellers and buyers every time. I go in to every listing knowing we will succeed. Any other result isn’t acceptable. I use experience, tenacity and ingenuity.

What role do you do think an agent should play for a client?

I am a voice for my client. A transaction is much more difficult than it appears. Even one small clerical error can throw a deal into a tailspin and expose clients to litigation. A top-selling agent with only a few years of experience might not know how to handle a tricky deal. Experience is everything.

What is your business philosophy?

My clients will tell you I work tirelessly for them and get them results. I keep a laser sharp focus on what we are doing until we succeed. That has made me Power’s number one agent. I am honest, straightforward and I really care about the people I work for.

How do you keep yourself current in terms of education, real estate law, financing, technology, etc.?

I have hired one of the top real estate consultants in the country to keep me at the top of my game. We discuss local and national trends, constantly improving service and every other facet of real estate.

How have you developed as a realtor since you first began?

Nineteen years of experience has made me tougher. I am extremely capable of representing my clients and don’t take stressful or emotional situations personally. This is an everyday experience in real estate.

What is your favorite part in the process when working with a client?

I have to be honest. I really like the closing, as there is usually hugging involved.

What have you learned from your clients?

To listen carefully – they will tell you what they need and want if you keep your ears open. Goals are not always the same and I want to get clients to their personal goals.

What do you do if you think a buyer or seller is making a bad decision?

I educate sellers and buyers so they make good decisions. If they are on the wrong track, I tell them. Usually people just need better options put in front of them.

How has your approach to the business changed in the challenging market?

It’s all about problem solving. In some cases, the problems get bigger, but then experience takes over and we just get tougher and more creative in thinking of ways to accomplish our goal.

What is a client’s biggest challenge in today’s market?

The market changes daily. I am constantly asked: Is it a seller’s market or a buyer’s market? The answer depends on the community, the price and the week. I can answer those questions because I stay out in front of the market at all times. It’s helpful to keep up on national trends and local industry.

Has anyone in your career path been a strong mentor?

My dad is one mentor. He taught me to view every job and challenge as if it is the most important, and to never focus on how much I’d be paid. I remember this in all areas of my life and strive to be like him.

What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

Give 110% at all times.

What is the most important piece of advice you give to a client?

Always remember your goal. It’s easy to get caught up in the moments of a transaction and make decisions based on emotion. If you are always aware of your goal, decisions become clearer.

How do you recharge during down time?

I have two children, Henry, 16 and George, 13. I spend time watching George’s lacrosse games, Henry’s cross country meets and go to both boys’ music concerts at the Whitefish Bay Middle and High schools. I love to play tennis, run and help many of my friends with decorating.

What professional/charitable organizations and activities you involved with?

I volunteer for the Whitefish Bay Civic Foundation, Hunger Task Force, The Whitefish Bay High School Cross Country team and The United Methodist Church of Whitefish Bay. I also coached Whitefish Bay Little League for 4 years.