Sioux Falls, SD

They call themselves "Chivers" and "Chivettes." If you're over the age of 35, you may never have heard of "The Chive."

Check it out online and you'll see a humorous website with plenty of pictures of scantily-clad women. Some nine million people visit The Chive's site every month; mostly men between the ages of 18 and 34.

But The Chive is also a growing movement of generation X do-gooders. The movement has its own charity culture which believes in random acts of kindness and raising money at "meet-ups," which are basically an excuse to party for a cause.

A couple of brothers from California started The Chive and it's more than a website; it's a lifestyle. They may consider themselves outsiders, but millions of "Chivers" are creating their own culture based on fun, partying, and of all things--charity.

"It's just something a lot of my friends were talking about-you have to download this app--it's so fun-it will brighten your day," Nogosek said.

For 30-year-old Nicole Nogosek, The Chive's vibe resonated with her.

"Just to stay cool, relax and give back to the community and have fun while doing it," Nogosek said.

She hundreds of others have already joined the local "Chive On Sioux Falls" chapter, since it formed just a couple of weeks ago.

"I'd been on the website before and I have friends on the Chive and I didn't really understand the full concept. Most people don't really know what the Chive is all about," Chris Hintz said.

Hintz is one of the leaders of the local group, holding its first event at the Icon Lounge in Sioux Falls. And while it may just look like a party, these meet-ups, as Chivers call them, are really a benefit.

"The purpose is to have a great time, to celebrate life, to celebrate small accomplishments and give back to the communities that have been so good to us," Hintz said.

This first Sioux Falls "meet-up" is to raise money for a fellow "Chiver's" medical expenses. 22-year-old Josiah Ketcham was attending a Chive fundraiser in the Black Hills last month when he fell off a retaining wall and suffered a brain injury.

"He was in ICU for three days. He lost sight in his right eye; because that's the side he landed on. He is starting to cope with it," Friend Cody Vostad said.

"It's just really exciting to be able to help someone who has been a Chiver for a long time. He is Chive. He is everything it embodies; it's really special to be able to do this for him," Nogosek said.

"He's one of the last people to ask for help, but one of the first to give help. It's phenomenal what The Chive can do. It was two weeks ago this happened and we've already got a Chive meet up and everybody is behind it," Vostad said.

While Chivers are typically young and may not have many resources, they say there's power in numbers.

"As young people it's hard for us to be able to give to charities that are going to make a huge difference. If all of us can give something to someone, to some organization, to help in some way, shape or form, then collectively we can have a larger impact and that is why the Chive is so important," Hintz said.

And partying with a purpose is the way to "Chive On."

"Chivers are always willing to stick together and help each other no matter what," Vostad said.

It's a pretty cool thing-it really is," Hintz said.

The last Chive South Dakota "Meet Up” held at Saloon Number ten in Deadwood raised more than $25,000 for a Rapid City boy with a number of medical issues.