Speaker: Dr. Karen DeSalvo, acting assistant secretary of health at the Department of Health and Human Services. (Photo: Chris Smith, HHS)

Health care spending last year rose at the highest rate since 2008, thanks in large part to far more people being insured but also a 12% increase in drug spending, federal data out Wednesday showed.

The rate of growth in health spending is lower than before the Affordable Care Act took effect, but many believe the cost increases require more of a focus on non-medical solutions to health issues.

National experts will explore some of these evidence-backed programs during a Friday morning forum that will be live-streamed on usatoday.com.

The event, presented by USA TODAY and Cigna, runs from 9-11 a.m. at the Newseum in Washington. One panel will feature two public health thought leaders: Georges Benjamin, executive director of the American Public Health Association; and Richard Hamburg, deputy director of the Trust for America's Health. They will talk about keeping whole populations healthy and reducing health disparities, especially in urban areas.

Dr. Georges Benjamin, executive director of the American Public Health Association, (Photo: APHA)

Karen DeSalvo, a physician who is acting assistant secretary of health at the Department of Health and Human Services and the department's top health IT official, will be discussing the best ways she's seen for communities and technology to address health inequities, especially in urban areas. Before joining HHS, DeSalvo was health commissioner in New Orleans, where she worked as a community leader after Hurricane Katrina to set up a neighborhood-based care network for the most vulnerable residents.

Rosanne Haggerty, CEO of Community Solutions, a nonprofit focusing on homelessness, will discuss how its partnerships between businesses, government officials and residents in poor neighborhoods in Hartford and Brooklyn have boosted health.

Cigna CEO David Cordani will also share his thoughts on urban health.

While many people think of staying well as an individual responsibility, where you live plays a huge role. Place and culture help determine social norms and access to affordable housing, safe neighborhoods, healthy food and places to exercise.

But many communities face challenges that hinder health, such as poverty, violence and lack of education — problems that contribute to rising health care costs that everyone pays for. Friday's speakers will discuss some proven solutions.

Benjamin, for example, plans to share the story of the "Green Carts" program in New York City, through which mobile food carts sell fresh fruits and vegetables in under-served neighborhoods. When the idea was first proposed, he said, vendors who wanted to serve hot dogs and other traditional street food fought it.

But the health department and its supporters ultimately won, he said, and "they improved access to fresh fruits and vegetables in under-served communities and got rid of the myth that low-income folks won't eat fresh fruits and vegetables."

Benjamin said such solutions work for a few major reasons: "They're culturally sensitive. They're focused on the needs of people in the area. And they're designed to work where they are."

Tre Mims lost 100 pounds in the last three years thanks to healthy eating so is glad to see fruit and vegetables at a nearby convenience store (Photo: Jayne O'Donnell, USA TODAY)

In September, USA TODAY and Cigna hosted a forum in Houston that focused more on challenges facing that part of the country and rural areas. Residents in the sprawling city talked about their health challenges, and barber Tre Sims discussed overcoming his. He's lost 100 pounds in the last three years by eating healthier and no longer suffers from high blood pressure. Now he picks up fruit at the convenience store near his work, instead of the junk food he used to eat. He can do that thanks to the Healthy Corner Store Network, a partnership between Go Healthy Houston and the community organization CAN DO Houston, which stands for Children and Neighbors Defeat Obesity.

The hope is to begin to patch together a road map to a healthier nation and to start a national dialogue about how to get there.

Follow the conversation on Twitter at #healthiercommunities.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Qk47kS