Flesh, blood, vice: It's all news

Manhattan: I am appalled that two women Voicers are appalled at Daily News photos of women showing off their natural beauty. I am also flabbergasted to why someone would think a newspaper should be “family-friendly.” If you want news to be family-friendly, then voice your concerns to the corrupt politicians, murderers, rapists, thieves and other headliners.

Children should not be reading the newspaper. It will not benefit them until they’ve achieved the capacity of critical thinking and reasoning. People also give the supposedly family-friendly Bible to study, even though it, too, is full of corruption, murder, rape, kidnapping, thieves, war and bigotry. When kids ask why God ever made a law to rape a virgin and pay 50 shekels to her father for marriage, come back and tell me about the “tasteless indecency” of a woman confidently and artistically showing off a beautifully sculpted body. Preston Baez

Skimpy coverage

Kew Gardens: First warm day and page 3 features young girls in skimpy bikinis. No sign of exposed men: Shocker! Jessica Glass

Earth Day, everyone

Brooklyn: “We do not inherit the Earth from our ancestors; we borrow it from our children” is a Native American proverb that reminds us of the impact of our current actions on future generations — and an important philosophy to remember as we celebrate Earth Day. We live here. It’s our home. As holistic nurses, my friends and I are committed to preserving the environment and recognizing our connection to the healing powers of Mother Earth. Since we all must share its resources, we ask all who live on the planet to join us. Our precious Earth supplies natural healing opportunities from sunlight, minerals and plants. Staying connected to nature is vital to our health and well-being. We cannot function or live well if our water, air or land are polluted. The more we nurture and live in harmony with our environment, the more we open ourselves up to peace and kindness, which in turn promote a healthier life. Marci Resnicoff

Another bad deal

Brooklyn: The Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact under negotiation is a bad deal for the American middle class and for the health of every American. Not only that, but it will put all of our climate protections, meager as they are, in jeopardy, in a bad deal for the planet. I just can’t understand why President Obama is doing this. Stop it in its tracks! Jessica Flagg

Scheduling a visit

Astoria: I look forward to the decriminalization of various offenses by Melissa Mark-Viverito so I can go to her place of residence and ride my bicycle on the sidewalk to her home, and, after finishing my beer and listening to my music, proceed to urinate on her sidewalk as I depart and toss my empty beer can into the whispering wind at her front door. Aden O’Donnell

Still crimes, for now

Kew Gardens Hills: I’m surprised Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito and the rest of the blockheads on the City Council are not trying to decriminalize murder and rape. Barr Koppel

Choice ticket

Brooklyn: The best police reform out there is a simple idea called discretion. Cops are no longer taught it. If the NYPD encouraged common-sense policing instead of vapid notions of “zero tolerance,” the cops and their communities would both be better off. Eugene Durante

Back at you

Mahopac, N.Y.: Well, I have seen it all now, with the Daily News’ Tuesday headline referring to our brave men and women of the New York City Police Department as “dummies” (“Policing for dummies,” April 21). Maybe the headline could be more appropriate rewritten as “newspaper reporting for dummies.” Michael J. Murphy

Poll position

Staten Island: To Voicer Linda Wyatt: Exactly what law did the GOP pass that “keeps minorities from voting”? David Fine

Say on pay

Brooklyn: Hey, Voicer Marty Goodman: Where did you go to school? If a person works six hours per day, five days per week, that totals 30 hours per week. If they make $15 per hour that would total $450 a week before taxes, not $600. Clare Butts

Unfair trade

Astoria: Having been to Cuba, I could have told Gov. Cuomo not to waste his time and the taxpayers’ money. What New York product or vacation can a Cuban afford on a $20 monthly average salary? And what can we purchase from Cuba? Their only two industries are sugar and tobacco. Just what we need more of! If the governor wants to promote trade he should go to Puerto Rico or the U.S. Virgin Islands. Who dreamed up this boondoggle? Richard Nebenzahl

Hate on the beach

Cedarhurst, L.I.: Why did Gov. Cuomo threaten to boycott Indiana over its religious freedom legislation yet races over to Cuba, with its history of human rights violations, to do business there? Adam Moskowitz

Time for a tax refund

Saugerties, N.Y.: In her letter to President Obama, Voicer Kathie Dunn certainly provided forceful statements and opinion, but whether she has any facts on her side is questionable. For example, she complains that she works and makes $30,000 for herself and her college daughter, has the maximum withheld by her employer, and still owes a thousand dollars in taxes. I don’t know who does her taxes, but a review of the IRS 1040 instructions would show that she could claim a $9,100 deduction as Head of Household, and $7,900 for two exemptions for herself and daughter. This would result in about $13,000 in taxable income, with a potential tax bill of about $1,300. She is also eligible for an earned income credit of at least $1,356, so even without considering the “maximum withheld” by her employer, she would be eligible for a refund! As for Affordable Care Act payments that had to be made, if Dunn’s employer offered health coverage and she could not afford it, she in all likelihood qualified for an exemption to any payment, but did not claim it. Rich Dooley

Just watch

Staten Island: Re “ISIS vid horror” (April 20): President Obama’s silence is deafening. Gloria Delio

No contest

Manhattan: To Voicer James J. Moglia: Maybe I’m wrong, but I don’t think the “legal residents” in the contest rules refer to an individual’s immigration status. I’m thinking the sponsors have in mind people who are in the United States vacationing from another country, or have a visitor’s visa, or live in a possession of the U.S. They are not “legal residents” of the 50 states, and thus can’t enter the contest. Vanessa Enger

Short history of mayors

Brooklyn: I read with interest the statement that the “short, bespectacled (Scott) Stringer might not look the part” of mayor (“A ‘String’ theory,” April 19). While it is true that New York has occasionally elected tall men to the top job, including Bill de Blasio, John Lindsay and Ed Koch, we have also elected our share of shorter mayors, including Abe Beame, Michael Bloomberg and Fiorello LaGuardia. Ira Cure

Life of crime

Kew Gardens: The saddest part of the story “He ‘soaked’ the stores” (April 18) is the 17-year-old neighbor who thinks that this man was “making a living.” Someone needs to look into how this child’s parents “make a living.” Or just keep tabs on this kid: I can guarantee he will end up in jail if he thinks stealing is making a living. Kevin Hargrove has cost everyone money. He is a crook and should be prosecuted to the full extent of the law. He should go to jail and be required to pay back Stop & Shop every penny he stole. Cathy Kleiman

Man vs. machine

Jamaica: Seems like karmic justice that Kevin Hargrove was able to switch bar codes and steal from supermarkets by using self-service checkouts. Had the stores not reduced the number of employees by replacing people with machines, he would never have gotten away with it, as the cashier would have noticed. Perhaps he might even have been able to support his family working at one of the jobs eliminated. The stores were hoisted by their own petards. Yvonne Scibelli

Wiped out

Rockaway Park: OK, I’ve heard enough bad puns about the Diaper Bandit. With prices so high, he did what anybody would do. Do. Maureen McNelis