Wendy Conquest, a Boulder sexual addiction therapist, says she wrote her book as a different type of support for her clients. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Get help If you or a loved one needs help with a sex addiction, here are a few local resources: • Read "Letters to a Sex Addict: The Journey through Grief and Betrayal," by Wendy Conquest, available online at most major booksellers or wendyconquest.com. • Take a free sexual addiction screening test online at recoveryzone.com/tests/sex-addiction. • Look online and choose from the many sex addiction therapists along the Front Range, as well as support groups for addicts and partners.

How it feels A person who finds out their partner has been unfaithful may experience a variety of different responses, including: • Emotional instability, quick shifts from rage to sadness to hope • Hyper-vigilance, endless questions and checking technology • Obsession about the trauma • Depression, isolation, trouble sleeping • Compulsive behaviors, drinking, shopping, gambling • Boundary problems • Self-blame • Denial • Trying to make physical changes, such as having more sex, losing weight Source: "Letters to a Sex Addict," by Wendy Conquest

I can't forgive you. Not now.

Maybe later. It's too big. I'd be forgiving something I can't even understand. I'd be saying everything is okay when it obviously is not.

I need you to forgive me for not being able to forgive you. Maybe we can start there.

That chapter, "Forgiveness." hits many readers hard, says Wendy Conquest.

Every story of infidelity is slightly different, just like every chapter in her book, says Conquest, a Boulder therapist and director and president of the Sex Addiction Counseling Center.

Yet, in talking with hundreds of people who inspired the fictional letters in her book, some shared responses rise to the surface. And in that, she says, she hopes partners affected by sex addiction realize they're not alone.

Conquest is the author of "Letters to a Sex Addict: The Journey through Grief and Betrayal," a book designed to help people deal with the news that their partner has been unfaithful. The book is directed toward sex addiction, although it can help people process the complex emotions related to infidelity, too, she says.

Sex addiction is different than infidelity, therapists say, in that the addiction can be rooted in trauma and exhibit many characteristics of other kinds of addictions, such as withdrawal, compulsive behavior or social and career losses.

On the heels of the recent Ashley Madison database hack, which leaked the information of 37 million-plus users of the social media network designed to facilitate infidelity, countless people might suddenly be experiencing the "trauma of betrayal," Conquest says,

Colorado was the second-most unfaithful state, behind only Alabama, according to a state-by-state analysis of Ashley Madison transaction amounts by Jake Popham, a self-described "aspiring data scientist." However, Popham speculated Alabama could have reached the top spot simply because people who created fake accounts might not have changed that state from the default setting. Which would put Colorado right at the top.

Conquest considers marital betrayal an actual trauma. In the 16 years she has been treating trauma, she says, she began noticing the most traumatized population of all her clients were partners of infidelity. This drove her to research the topic deeper, and it has since become an emphasis in her work.

Other people not directly affected by the Ashley Madison hack might find themselves experiencing PTSD or anxiety at the sudden surge in the topic of cheating.

Empathizing with what so many partners are going through right now awoke the pain for a Boulder County woman, who asked to withhold her last name to possibly prevent retaliation from her ex-husband.

Several years ago, she says, she found out her husband of more than two decades had an entire life she knew nothing about. One day, she says, she casually picked up his phone after hearing the chime of a text arriving. The sexually explicit photos and messages she found were only the beginning, she says.

"The shock and trauma that hits a spouse — there's no way that your mind can wrap around what's happening," she says. "The lights go out and you have no coping mechanism, and it's so black and white from what your life was that you don't know how to cope, or who to reach out to. You don't know what to do."

When she tried to get help, she says some of the therapists and support groups she found practiced the belief that some partners of sex addicts are "co-addicts."

COSA, the 12-step program for partners of sex addicts, says up front that "one of the most difficult aspects of what we call co-sex addiction or sexual codependency, is grasping and facing the truth of our own condition."

That might have been more prevalent in the past, the woman says, but she thinks there's a growing number of partners, like herself, who truly have no idea there's a problem. Technology, such as the Ashley Madison website, makes it easy to have secret lives. She says she believes a new and growing crop of sexual deviants is emerging that therapy professionals are not sure how to address.

"What I'm talking about is so much bigger. It's the hidden life," she says. "That's what all these websites allow. You're allowed to have this hidden, fanciful life that no one knows about. This is serial cheating on such a massive scope, and websites like this promote it and allow it."

Although she says her husband was not on Ashley Madison (to prevent the money trail), she says she found out he was on countless other websites using fake names and email addresses she didn't know about.

"He said there was no way he could ever capture where he went. One website led to the next, and six hours later, he's down this rabbit hole, and that's where he was every single day," the woman says. "Ashley Madison is just one of billions of websites. Just because he's not there doesn't mean you're safe."

Conquest says she started writing her book as a resource to her clients who needed a different kind of support. She says many of them were reading research and literature about sex addiction, but what they really needed was a simple, direct connection to their experiences and feelings.

She says she now uses the book with her clients to help them identify their emotions and realize they're not alone. She has them read the various letters in the book, all based on real patterns she saw in therapy, but not based on actual clients, and identify which resonate the deepest.

For some, it's the "Only Me" chapter: "Know when I demand you trash her very existence, it is because I am fighting for my place as your wife, your partner and the mother of your children."

For others, it's the "Why Me?" letter: "What the hell did I do to deserve this? I try not to go to this place but I really am trying to figure out why this happened and why to me."

Regardless, one thing is certain, Conquest says: Therapists have seen a huge spike in infidelity and sex addiction since 2001, and she connects that with the Internet.

And an online addiction hurts just as bad as "crossing-the-flesh line," as Conquest puts it.

"If he's doing it secretly and lying about it and their relationship to sex with their wife shifts, the injury is just as devastating as if they had actually been with the woman," Conquest says.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay