MILPITAS, Calif., March 3, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- RotaCare Bay Area, a not for profit organization with twelve free medical clinics in the greater Bay Area, has named senior non-profit executive, Augustine Gill as its chief executive officer. He replaces Tammy Janosik, who decided to leave RotaCare Bay Area and pursue her interests in other areas of the non-profit sector.

"Augustine brings a wealth of knowledge and a world of experience in healthcare assistance programs," said John Thomas, RotaCare Bay Area board president. "His experience in operations and strategic planning will be key to the success of RotaCare as we adapt to a new healthcare landscape."

Augustine Gill joins RotaCare Bay Area from Catholic Charities in the East Bay where he served as its interim chief operating officer. Mr. Gill has extensive non-profit experience and has worked with reputable organizations such as the American Red Cross, Save the Children and International Rescue Committee in senior management roles. He has lived and worked in Africa, Asia, Middle East, Europe and South/Central Asia serving the most vulnerable through the provision of health, education and economic development opportunities. Augustine has also focused a major part of his career on strategic planning, fundraising and organizational development as well as successfully launching numerous new operations worldwide and taking them to scale.

Augustine lives in Moraga, East Bay with his wife and two children.

About RotaCare Bay Area

RotaCare Bay Area is a volunteer alliance of medical professionals, organizations and community members dedicated to providing free primary, quality healthcare services to uninsured families and individuals with limited ability to pay for medical care.

The organization was formed in 1989 when a local Rotarian and his club identified that many local residents had limited access to primary health care services. They resolved to meet the need, first with a clinic in Santa Clara. Since then, RotaCare Bay Area has grown to 12 clinics which are operated in Coastside (Half Moon Bay), Concord, Daly City, Gilroy, Monterey, Mountain View, Pittsburg, Richmond, San Jose, San Leandro, San Rafael, and Santa Cruz. In 2013, the Free Medical Clinics experienced over 27,500 patient visits. Since its founding RotaCare has recorded more than 230,000 patient visits. The organization receives no government funding or insurance reimbursement.

Even with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, RotaCare Clinics are still very much in need. Millions of Californians remain uninsured and without an affordable option for Healthcare. RotaCare is poised and ready to be the safety net for those members of the community.

Augustine Gill 408-263-8175; E-mail: augustineg@rotacarebayarea.org