This week in Washington, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced new regulations to stomp out Medicare fraud and proposed delaying penalties for poorly performing ACOs, while the FDA approved another pump-sensor combo for insulin-dependent diabetics.

Also this week, MedPage Today News Editor Joyce Frieden sat down with Jocelyn Samuels, director of the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) at the Department of Health and Human Services, to discuss her office's responsibilities and its expanded powers under the Affordable Care Act.

CMS Attempts to Curb Medicare Fraud

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is issuing new rules to help prevent Medicare fraud and abuse by barring physicians with unpaid debt from re-entering the system and ejecting providers who have a history of abusive billing practices, according to a statement released Wednesday.

"CMS has removed nearly 25,000 providers from Medicare and the new rules help us stop bad actors from coming back in as we continue to protect our patients," Shantanu Agrawal, MD, CMS deputy administrator and director of the Center for Program Integrity, said in the statement.

The agency's strategy for curbing unscrupulous providers includes using new predictive analytics technology, implementing fingerprint-based criminal background checks, and temporarily freezing enrollment of new ambulances and home health providers in seven "fraud hot spots."

The new regulations are expected to save taxpayers more than $327 million each year.

New ACO Rules Would Delay Penalties an Extra 3 Years

Healthcare systems experimenting with a new way of being paid by Medicare would have 3 extra years before they could be punished for poor performance, the federal government proposed Monday.

The proposal is one of dozens of changes that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services wants to make to rules governing accountable care organizations. ACOs are affiliations of doctors, hospitals, and other providers that jointly care for Medicare patients with the goal of pocketing a portion of what they save the government. Those that spend above Medicare estimates stand to lose money.

There are more than 330 such networks around the country caring for about 5 million people through the Medicare Shared Savings Program, which includes most of the ACOs. The revisions to the program are intended to entice providers to form new ACOs and to keep existing ones in the program, which is voluntary.

FDA Okays Second Pump-Sensor Combo

The FDA approved the Animas Vibe, an integrated insulin pump and continuous glucose monitor (CGM) system, for insulin-dependent diabetes patients ages 18 and up, the company announced Tuesday.

It is the second CGM-enabled insulin pump to come to market; the first was the Medtronic MiniMed, approved in April 2006.

The pump has a Dexcom G4 Platinum CGM built right into it, enabling patients to view their glucose data and administer insulin directly from the pump, which allows them to carry one less piece of equipment.

Animas said it is now accepting orders for the device and expects to start shipping in January 2015.

HHS Civil Rights Director Talks Opportunities, Challenges

MedPage Today News Editor Joyce Frieden talked Tuesday with OCR Director Jocelyn Samuels about sex discrimination in healthcare, the Ebola Bulletin, and privacy and security protections surrounding mental health information during background checks for gun ownership, as well as the office's expanded powers under the Affordable Care Act.

Samuels, who began her job in August, was previously the acting assistant attorney general for civil rights at the Department of Justice, where she managed the operations of the Civil Rights Division.

Next Week

On Monday, the Alliance for Health Reform will convene a panel to discuss policy, regulatory, and other concerns related to digital health innovations.

On Wednesday, the Senate Subcommittee on African Affairs will discuss the Ebola epidemic and the international response.

On Thursday, the FDA's Pediatric Oncologic Subcommittee will discuss the potential of three new adult cancer drugs in various stages of development for use in children.

On Friday, the Orthopaedic and Rehabilitation Devices Panel of the Medical Devices Advisory Committee will discuss the Superion InterSpinous Spacer for patients suffering from pain and numbness and/or cramping in the legs.