Get smarter on family planning





Photo: ROBERT MCLEROY /SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Texas, upset over abortion, has long waged a battle to oust Planned Parenthood and this has likely had dire consequences on family planning in the state. Medical assistant, Denise Lujan (right) cleans an examination room at Planned Parenthood clinic in San Antonio. less Texas, upset over abortion, has long waged a battle to oust Planned Parenthood and this has likely had dire consequences on family planning in the state. Medical assistant, Denise Lujan (right) cleans an ... more Photo: ROBERT MCLEROY /SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS Image 2 of 2 Despite Texas’ efforts to close down Planned Parenthood over the issue of abortion, the San Antonio chapter was constructing a new building in 2014 meeting new state standards. Abortion aside, the state’s fight has likely deteriorated the state’s family planning. less Despite Texas’ efforts to close down Planned Parenthood over the issue of abortion, the San Antonio chapter was constructing a new building in 2014 meeting new state standards. Abortion aside, the state’s ... more Photo: Edward A. Ornelas /San Antonio Express-News Get smarter on family planning 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

Texas casts itself as among the most respectful in the nation of tax dollars and those who pay them. Yet it enacts or considers policies — currently, this includes tax cuts — that place or will place more burdens on the state treasury.

This is nowhere more apparent than in its attitude toward family planning.

A recent report by the Guttmacher Institute tracks the link between unintended pregnancies and public costs for them nationally and in the states. Though the last figures it gives are for 2010, what’s occurred in Texas since then offers little hope that the state’s No. 1 ranking in tax dollars spent on unintended pregnancies — actually all births — is much abated.

The report says Texas led the nation in 2010, spending $2.9 billion in public funds for unintended pregnancies. Now consider what has occurred since 2010.

The state has waged a high-profile battle against the premier provider of family planning services in Texas and the nation. That would be Planned Parenthood. It did this though the clinics that get government funding for family planning cannot legally perform abortions.

The state tried to boot Planned Parenthood from the joint state-funded and federally funded Women’s Health Program in 2012. When Planned Parenthood prevailed in court and the federal government balked, the state opted to run the program itself, having the effect of missing out on a 9-to-1 federal match for every state dollar spent.

This followed a cut in family-planning funding by two-thirds the year before. And though the state substantially replaced these funds, it’s unlikely the damage has been undone. Clinics closed, not all of them Planned Parenthood’s.

Texas spends so much public money on births because it is among the most populous in the country. And, still, it’s noteworthy that California has more people and spends less on this. The percentages tell a story. Nearly 61 percent of all Texas births were publicly funded in 2010 in Texas and 73.7 percent of all unintended births were.

The Guttmacher report notes, “Rates of unintended pregnancy are far higher among women living at or near the poverty level than among higher-income women.” Texas has no shortage of low-income people, who are eligible for Medicaid during pregnancy.

Since 2010, unintended pregnancy — and birth rates generally — have been trending downward. This occurs, however, as the medical costs of pregnancies have inched upward and Medicaid rolls have expanded. This occurs even in those states, such as Texas, that have not expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. Beyond more poor people, this also happens because determining ACA eligibility in states without their own exchanges often uncovers Medicaid eligibility.

The fact that Medicaid and other programs provide care to pregnant women — and to their children later — is part of what makes these programs so valuable. But, clearly, the state can save much if it invested more — including removing the ban on Planned Parenthood — in family planning. The state, according to Guttmacher, could save $620.5 million in state funds and $1.5 billion in federal funds if it more efficiently helped prevent these unintended pregnancies.

By family planning, we are referring to the kind of care, including birth control, that prevents pregnancies and otherwise helps women space out their wanted pregnancies. And, yes, this investment should start with age-appropriate, medically accurate sexual education in the schools, beyond teaching just abstinence.

Unless Texas gets smarter about family planning, it cannot call itself a wise steward of public funds.