Photo

WASHINGTON — Doctors, hospitals and health insurance companies clashed Thursday over the merits of mergers planned by four of the five biggest insurers in the United States.

The confrontation came at a hearing of a House Judiciary subcommittee that is investigating competition in the industry and how it would be affected by mergers combining Aetna with Humana and Anthem with Cigna.

Daniel T. Durham, an executive vice president of America’s Health Insurance Plans, a trade group for the industry, told Congress that the consolidation could promote competition and benefit consumers, achieving economies of scale that reduce costs.

Moreover, Mr. Durham said, insurers are trying to counter the “harmful impact of consolidation among hospitals and other health care providers” and what he called “monopoly pricing” by makers of some prescription drugs.

However, Thomas L. Greaney, an expert on health and antitrust law at St. Louis University, said he was skeptical of the argument that insurers had to merge to counter the market power of hospitals and doctors.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Professor Greaney likened giant insurers and hospital systems to sumo wrestlers. “Experience suggests that a showdown between the sumo wrestlers may well result in a handshake rather than an honest wrestling match,” he testified.

Even if a dominant insurer succeeds in bargaining successfully with providers, Mr. Greaney said, “it has little incentive to pass along the savings to its policyholders.”

Witnesses from the American Hospital Association and the American Medical Association harshly criticized the proposed mergers.

“The Anthem-Cigna transaction threatens to reduce competition in at least 817 markets across the United States serving 45 million consumers,” said Richard J. Pollack, the president of the hospital association.

Anthem operates Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans in a number of states, and Mr. Pollack said that Anthem’s acquisition of Cigna could “further entrench” the dominant position of such Blue plans in many insurance markets.

Mr. Pollack assailed the proposed Aetna-Humana deal on other grounds, saying it would eliminate competition between the companies’ Medicare Advantage plans.

More than 30 percent of the 55 million Medicare beneficiaries have enrolled in such private plans, attracted by the promise of extra benefits and lower costs.

Mr. Durham, the insurance industry representative, said that hospital mergers often led to substantial increases in hospital prices, and that those increases led to higher premiums.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In addition, he said, when hospitals buy physician groups, the doctors tend to charge more.

Mr. Pollack challenged those arguments. “The annual growth in hospital prices has been low and declining,” he said, and hospital clinics face competition from walk-in clinics at CVS, Walgreens and Walmart stores.

Dr. Barbara L. McAneny, a trustee of the American Medical Association, said that “the concentration of market power among a handful of nationwide insurers” could interfere with doctors’ ability to care for patients.

The mergers, she said, could threaten the “health and safety of American patients,” and if the deals are consummated, “there is simply no going back.”

The Justice Department is reviewing the deals to see if they would violate the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which generally prohibits mergers and acquisitions if the effect “may be substantially to lessen competition.”

At the hearing Thursday, House members expressed keen interest in the mergers, but their views did not appear to have crystallized into support or opposition.

They did split along party lines on a related question: whether the Affordable Care Act was driving consolidation in the insurance and hospital industries.

Representative Robert W. Goodlatte, Republican of Virginia and chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, said the 2010 law “put in place a regulatory structure that stifled competition and instituted incentives for increased market consolidation.”

But Representative Hank Johnson, Democrat of Georgia, said: “The Affordable Care Act is a reaction to, not a cause of, consolidation in the health care marketplace. Waves of consolidation among health care providers and insurers occurred long before the Affordable Care Act.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Johnson said that competition among health plans in the new public insurance markets had held down premiums while increasing the number of choices available to consumers.

Dr. Scott Gottlieb, a resident fellow at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, who was a federal health official from 2003 to 2007, said, “In the commercial market for private coverage, there’s been a contraction in the number of carriers offering health plans.”

“Only about 50 new health carriers have entered the commercial market since 2008,” Dr. Gottlieb said at the hearing. “Half of these are the struggling not-for-profit co-op plans that the Affordable Care Act subsidizes. Around 40 health plans have left the market over this same stretch of time.”