NJ Transit and union officials have both said they would prefer to reach a settlement on Thursday and avoid a Sunday morning rail strike.

"Our concern is to get it done at the table," Stephen Burkert, union coalition spokesman said at Wednesday's NJ Transit board meeting. "We'd like to get this done tomorrow (Thursday) if we could... lock it up, get it signed. I don't think undue stress on the commuters of NJ Transit helps anyone."



The union and NJ Transit negotiation teams return to the bargaining table Thursday morning with less than three days until a possible rail strike, which both sides said they want to avoid.



NJ Transit's Interim Executive Director Dennis Martin wouldn't speculate on the likelihood of a strike, but echoed a similar desire to avoid a work stoppage.



"We'll remain talking until we get it settled," he said.





If a settlement isn't reached, that doesn't automatically mean a strike will take place, even though union members have voted to authorize a strike.



"What we're looking at is, March 13 is the end of a (90-day) cooling off period. That doesn't means a work stoppage has to happen exactly at 12:01 a.m. if we think there is progress being made," Burkert said.



The other alternative that could sideline trains is if NJ Transit officials decide to lock workers out, which Martin said he does not plan to do.



A strike or lock out would idle all NJ Transit commuter trains, forcing 105,000 daily rail commuters to New York to find an alternative. NJ Transit's contingency plans call for using 200 substitute buses running from five park and ride lots. That plan can only accommodate a fraction of those riders, leaving 65,000 people having to find alternate transportation to work.



Although new proposals were put on the table on Tuesday, which the union took Wednesday off to evaluate, both sides still want something close to the agreements they proposed to the second Presidential Emergency Board late last year.

NJ Transit still coming up contingency plans

"We are prepared to go as long as necessary to reach an affordable agreement that's good for the commuters, the taxpayers and NJ Transit," Martin said.



What that means is NJ Transit wants a longer 7.5-year contract than the 6-year contract the unions are seeking. However, that time period includes the five years from 2011 when the last pact expired.



The unions want to pay 2.5 percent of their health insurance premiums, similar to what employees at other commuter railroads pay. NJ Transit sought 10 to 20 percent, depending on the plan. NJ Transit's stance may have softened on how much employees should contribute, but neither side is revealing details about the latest offers.



Union officials said high insurance payments could wipe out any wage increase gained. NJ Transit officials countered that would be made up for by checks due to employees for retroactive pay for the past five years worked without a new contract.



"We're not going to sign an agreement where people lose money," Burkert said. "We're looking for fair and equitable negotiations. Hopefully we're at that point."



NJ Transit officials said during hearings by the PEB that it estimated the cost of a settlement to be $183 million, which they said it can't afford. Martin declined to say if the cost of a settlement would prompt a fare increase this year.



"The structure of the settlement and the amount would determine how we have to fund it," he said.



Complicating negotiations is that this is the first time that all railroad labor groups are negotiating as one unit, representing workers as diverse as locomotive engineers to employees who maintain track and fix trains.



"This is the first time ever that one hundred percent of all rail workers are negotiating (as one group)," Burkert said. "You want to make sure the numbers you're proposing are accurate in every degree."



If talks go down to the wire on Saturday, federal negotiators from the National Mediation Board will be in New Jersey to help reach a settlement, the board said in a release.

Larry Higgs may be reached at lhiggs@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @commutinglarry. Find NJ.com on Facebook.