In the early summer, Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D) dropped not-so-subtle hints about his intentions: he was fully prepared to embrace Medicaid expansion by somehow circumventing Republican state lawmakers.

The governor said in June his Department of Health and Human Resources “will have a plan on my desk by no later than September, first detailing how we can move Virginia health care forward even in the face of the demagoguery, lies, fear and cowardice that have gripped this debate for too long.”

McAuliffe, who ran on a platform of Medicaid expansion during his successful campaign last year, followed through, but it turns out there’s a pretty severe limit on what a governor can do in the face of unyielding legislative opposition.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D), who vowed in June to defy the Republican-controlled legislature and expand healthcare to 400,000 uninsured Virginians, unveiled a much more modest plan Monday after being thwarted by federal rules and a last-minute change to state budget language. McAuliffe outlined measures to provide health insurance to as many as 25,000 Virginians, just a fraction of those he had hoped to cover by expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

No one can doubt the governor’s efforts – he tried everything he could think of. But in order for Virginia to do the smart and responsible thing, the GOP-led legislature would have to do what policymakers in most states have done: embrace the basic arithmetic of Medicaid expansion.

And Virginia Republicans simply would not budge. To this extent, far-right GOP lawmakers “won” the fight – roughly 375,000 low-income Virginians will not have access to affordable medical care, for reasons that defy moral comprehension.

The governor has vowed to keep fighting, but no one sees a scenario in which Virginia Republicans suddenly do the sensible thing, at least not anytime soon.

Sam P.K. Collins summarized how McAuliffe’s new policy would work: “The plan uses $40 million in leftover state funds to expand coverage to those without insurance – particularly children of state employees and those struggling with mental health issues. A report detailing McAuliffe’s plan also highlights an increase in educational outreach and assistance to residents during the fall open enrollment period for the federal insurance marketplace. “