TUSCALOOSA, Ala. —Here’s some good news for Colorado State football and its rebuilding project: Although Alabama prevailed 31-6 on Saturday night in front of 101,821 at Bryant-Denny Stadium, the Rams outplayed the top-ranked Crimson Tide in the third quarter and induced boos from frustrated ‘Bama fans.

But here’s the best news: For the remainder of CSU’s schedule, the Rams won’t face an opponent even remotely as talented as the two-time defending national champion.

Nearly a 40-point underdog, Colorado State (1-3) trailed just 17-6 into the fourth quarter and made enough plays to look like it belonged on the field with the best team in the land.

Total yards: Alabama 338, CSU 279.

“A loss is a loss,” Rams junior quarterback Garrett Grayson said. “But this game was huge for us. To play with the No. 1 team in the country means you can play with anyone.”

And to think that through three quarters, Alabama (3-0) and its Heisman Trophy candidate quarterback, AJ McCarron, were still without a third-down conversion. The Crimson Tide finished 2-for-10 on third downs.

“Our defense wouldn’t take no for an answer,” said CSU coach Jim McElwain, who served four seasons as Alabama’s offensive coordinator (2008-11). “I think guys on the other sideline learned some respect for Colorado State and how hard our guys play the game.”

Alabama’s defense, no doubt motivated by yielding 42 points a week earlier in a win over Texas A&M, was determined to keep the Rams out of the end zone. The Crimson Tide did just that. Colorado State did not penetrate Alabama territory in the first half. And the Crimson Tide defense dug in and forced the Rams to settle for field goals after two drives in the third quarter.

“(Alabama’s defense) wants to throw a shutout,” CSU’s McElwain said, “and what I mean is no yards. We did a few things (offensively). Some things we’d like to have back. But I’m proud of our guys.”

Alabama’s defense created the biggest play of the game, forcing a fumble by Grayson at the CSU 30 early in the fourth quarter. Crimson Tide linebacker Trey DePriest made the hit and recovered the ball.

On Alabama’s first play after the turnover, McCarron hit a wide-open DeAndrew White for a 30-yard touchdown to put the game away at 24-6 with 11:55 remaining. A senior, McCarron finished 20-for-26 for 258 yards and one touchdown.

The Crimson Tide netted just 66 yard rushing on 21 attempts — topped by 56 yards on seven tries by All-America candidate T.J. Yeldon, who accounted for 49 of those yards on one breakaway run.

“We obviously made some mistakes,” Alabama coach Nick Saban said. “We missed some big plays offensively.”

Rams cornerback Bernard Blake, also a junior, can etch his name among the select few who have intercepted McCarron, who threw only three interceptions in 2012 and led the nation in pass efficiency. Blake recorded the turnover by jumping a sideline route at the CSU 17-yard-line in the third quarter. That set up the Rams’ first score, a 45-yard field goal by Jared Roberts.

Roberts added a 31-yard field goal five seconds before the end of the third quarter.

For the Rams offense, true freshman wide receiver Rashard Higgins had seven receptions for 71 yards. Grayson remained poised in the pocket, even with future NFL draft choices flying by him, and finished 24-of-38 passing for 228 yards, without an interception.

With one nonconference game remaining — Saturday at home against UTEP — Colorado State should have gained a ton of confidence knowing that it went toe to toe with the No. 1 team in front of the biggest crowd any Rams team has played in front of and held its own.

“This is the No. 1 team in the nation,” CSU senior center Weston Richburg said. “Being able to hang with them is exciting (for the future).”

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Key stat

As well as Colorado State played against the nation’s best, the Rams moved into Alabama territory only three times (the last on the final possession with the outcome decided) and had to settle for two third-quarter field goals.

Key play

After Colorado State had cut the Alabama lead to 17-6 late in the third quarter, Crimson Tide Heisman Trophy candidate AJ McCarron connected with wide receiver DeAndrew White for a 30-yard touchdown with 11:47 remaining.

Tom Kensler, The Denver Post