What the first Clinton presidency suggests Hillary will do for affordable health care May 2

At the beginning of this month, presidential candidate Donald Trump released the bare essentials of his health care plan. Although the statement offered few details, it did contain a mix of conventional Republican nonsense together with some worthwhile elements.

Among the latter is Trump's intention to do away with the Affordable Care Act's requirement for every individual to buy health insurance. That was the fatal giveaway that Obama bestowed on insurance companies in return for ending their refusal to write policies on people with pre-existing conditions.

As a candidate in 2008, Barack Obama derided his opponent in the primaries, Hillary Clinton, for her proposal that required people to buy private health insurance. Then, then after he was elected, Obama adopted her exact position.

Some other provisions of Trump's plan include allowing health insurance plans to compete across states lines, enabling individuals to use health savings accounts, block-granting Medicaid to the states, and requiring price transparency from providers.

Relative to pharma, Trump would remove “barriers to entry into free markets for drug providers." Essentially that's another way of saying Trump would permit drug re-importation, something that pharma companies and their lapdogs in the Republican party consider anathema.

As Larry Biegelsen of Wells-Fargo wrote to investors, "This support for re-importation...and recent comments about [Medicare] negotiating drug prices are further evidence that Trump will not hesitate to disregard the Republican policy playbook at times."

As with any public policy plan, the devil is always in the details. But at least Trump shows here the rudiments of a pragmatic plan with some appealing features: reimportation, giving Medicare the ability to negotiate prices, interstate insurance sales.

Now implementing any of these features would pose a formidable task. For example, reimporting drugs from other countries would require a rigorous tracking system to make sure no local distributors slip in phonies. Secondly, the pharma companies will not passively allow reimportation to happen. They know the unit volume range that should go to Canada, the UK and the other ex-US countries and they may just decide not to ship larger amounts there. But here’s where a tough SOB such as Trump can and will stick it to the pharmas.

Instead of reimporting from Canada and the Commonwealth countries, he can agree with Brazil or India to do all of the reimportation from either of those countries. When the pharma companies limit volume shipments to them, the partner country can then threaten to declare compulsory licensing (i.e., break the patent) and get a high-quality generic house to make the Harvoni, Keytruda and Humira there under rigorous FDA inspection.

Pharma has exploited American consumers and taxpayers for 70 years because of a corrupt system put in place by the federal government. The U.S. approach to developing and distributing pharmaceuticals insulates the industry from the market’s rigors. Restoring the benefits of market competition to prescription drugs will require a tough, highly aggressive president who is willing to use the government to circumvent the rigged system that the government itself put in place.

None of this necessarily represents an endorsement of Trump. As with all candidates, a final assessment must await the details and, as noted above with respect to Obama, what they do once in office may depart enormously from what they said during the campaign. With Trump in particular, some of his positions on other issues are far from progressive.

Nonetheless, even with those disclaimers, Trump does recognize the importance of rectifying the increasing unaffordability of drugs and other health care costs. Whether he can or will address the problem effectively is anyone's guess.

On the other side, it remains a relative certainty that Hillary Clinton, the recipient of more campaign contributions from pharma than any other candidate, would make only marginal corrections at best.

In the highly improbable event that Bernie Sanders is elected, he appears to have no idea of what to do when he encounters a stone wall of opposition to Medicare-for-all on day one. His prediction that a popular "revolution" will force Congress to enact single-payer seems as likely as a reign of peace on earth and good will toward all.

Some day all Americans will be able to afford their medications, but that time doesn't appear to be at hand.

Read more from the Check Up blog »