Kyle, SD

Alcoholism, drug abuse and youth suicides often dominate the headlines coming from the Pine Ridge Reservation. But all across the reservation, young people are overcoming the bad news with accomplishments of their own.

At the Little Wound School in Kyle, a community approach to education is helping to improve graduation rates. It's also inspiring more kids to attend college.

Little Wound School has long been known for its basketball. But these days, Little Wound scholars are scoring points, too.

Three seniors earned prestigious Gates Millennium Scholarships this year, equaling those granted to students at the standard of K-12 educational excellence on the Pine Ridge Reservation - the Jesuit-run Red Cloud School near Pine Ridge.

"Red Cloud always has more Gates scholars than we do, it seems, but this year we tied them," says 18-year-old James Chief. "So I feel like we're getting better - better and better. And I think we're only going up from here."

It's not just big-name scholarships. Graduation rates are rising, as are the number of Little Wound seniors moving on to college or technical schools.

English teacher Russell Childree says that includes about 20 seniors, almost half of the 2015 class.

" I guess I would describe it as growing success," Childree said. "We had a couple Gates Scholars in the past, then this year we had three. We've had more students than ever taking the ACT, talking about going to college."

James Chief is on his way to Montana State University for a pre-med major. He spent the last four summers away from home, first with Upward Bound in Colorado and this summer with an internship at the National Institute of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.

"I suppose the main driving force would be my family, my mom," he says. "She's always been the one to push me to succeed, to do well, to strive for excellence. And also watching other people and learning from their examples - you know the saying, do as I say, not as I do. Learning what not to do, to put it nicely."

Making good choices in her studies and behavior led Little Wound senior Morgan Mesteth to the Gear Up summer program at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology. Next she earned a scholarship from the New York-based Leadership Enterprise for a Diverse America, along with a seven-week summer program at Princeton University this year.

There she suffered some culture shock.

"I felt really, I thought, out of place. I felt like I wasn't smart enough. I felt like I wasn't good enough, and I had like a little breakdown, because I felt like I wasn't meant for this," she said.

Then she thought about her family, her tribe and school, and her future.

"That's all that kept me going," she said. "I'm going to become something great from this."

There's no doubt among Little Wound staff members that's where the school scholars are headed.

"Oh yeah, they're going to change the world," says math teacher James Pratt. "They've got confidence in themselves. They're self driven. They're self-motivated. They have direction. They know where they're going to go. They have a goal in mind and they're not just going through the motions. They're actually going out and doing something."

James and Morgan plan to attend schools out of state. But they also intend to come back to their home reservation to make a difference.

"I do want to come back here and work for IHS or something," Chief says. "I do want to help the community."

"I want to come back and help other students make it just as far as I did," Mesteth says.

And they both want to show outsiders a reservation story that sometimes gets lost in sad headlines.

"It's easy to forget the good things when there's a lot of bad," Chief says. "But there's a lot of good."

Starting with some really good students.

Along with James Chief, Tarriah Provost and Shane Rooks were the Gates Millenium Scholarship winners at Little Wound this year. The scholarships by the Bill and Malinda Gates Foundation are awarded to low-income minority students who have excelled in academics, extracurricular activities, leadership and community service.