Topics: alternative medicine, Diabetes, Mike Huckabee, We can't believe we have to explain this, Sustainability News, Politics News

Presidential hopeful and “former diabetic” Mike Huckabee was recently spotted in a low-budget Internet informercial which claims that cinnamon rolls “contain a real ingredient that reverses diabetes.”

And with that, welcome back to “We can’t believe we have to explain this,” Salon’s physician-approved treatment for logically challenged politicians.

In his appearance as a spokesman for Barton Publishing’s “Diabetes Solution Kit,” Huckabee (who shall from here on out be known as the Huckster) explains that the prescription drugs endorsed by the medical community for treating type I and type II diabetes aren’t designed to help patients, but rather to turn them into “loyal, pill-popping, finger-pricking, insulin-shooting customer[s], so Big Pharma and the mainstream medical community can rake in over $100 billion annually.”

The Huckster, however, saw through this ruse. Instead of spending his money on medicine, he used methods similar to those described in Barton’s book to, as he puts it, “lose 110 pounds of fat, get my own blood sugar under control, and completely reverse my type 2 diabetes.”

But the informercial, with its promises to tell viewers the “truth” about diabetes for just $19.97, has all the markings of a money-making scam:

"This reporter" ordered Huckabee's diabetes "cure'' kit. I ended up with extra $67 charge on my Visa. http://t.co/ASYM1AIcfi — Trip Gabriel (@tripgabriel) March 16, 2015

A spokeswoman for the Huckster would not elaborate on the amount he was paid to appear in the infomercial; she told the New York Times that he ended his relationship with Barton several weeks back. Despite that, and despite the video’s get-it-before-it’s-gone warning — “we’re giving away so much free and hard-to-find diabetes remedy information that we may end up making this a paid membership website” — the endorsement is still up and free to view as of this posting.

A number of scientific organizations, including the American Diabetes Association and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), declined to provide an expert who could comment on what is and is not effective in treating diabetes; a representative from the Mayo Clinic explained that they didn’t want to get drawn into what he viewed as a political story. But David Schardt, Senior Nutritionist at the Center for Science in the Public Interest, was game to help set the record straight. Our conversation, which has been lightly edited for clarity, follows:

Have you encountered this company, Barton Publishing, before?

Oh, yes. Actually, a couple of years ago we looked into something they had about dissolving kidney stones with this homemade formula. It’s a company that publishes a lot of different health materials, and it’s sort of typical now of what goes on on the Internet and also with Kindle books and other ebook outlets, which is that this material on various topics is prepared by freelance writers or companies that then market them online or in infomercials.

If you look at the particular material that Huckabee and Barton are selling, it’s anonymous. You look at the book and nobody’s name is associated with it; that’s probably because it was done by freelancers who really don’t know much about the topic but can gather material from the Internet and put together an ebook, which is what he’s basically selling. Joe Barton does a lot of these, and apparently he’s successful. There are a lot of other people selling ebooks that they prepare based on what people want to buy; they find writers to write material and they sell it. And the quality may vary. When it’s non-medical stuff, probably nobody’s getting hurt, but when it’s medical material it can be misleading or less than useful for people who, in this case, are suffering from diabetes.

Where does this claim that cinnamon or chromium picolinate can reverse diabetes come from? Is there any scientific merit to it?

Both of them have been studied for their effects on blood glucose levels. And there are some studies: in the case of chromium, there’s a study in China done in 1997, so almost 20 years ago, and in the case of cinnamon there are a couple of studies overseas — one in particular in Iran — that show that it had at least short-term effects on blood glucose levels.

The thing is, most of the best research since then shows that neither has any impact on long-term blood glucose levels, which is what diabetics should be looking for; not something that will change something tomorrow, but something that will change something for months and years. When you look at that, chromium and cinnamon don’t have that effect.