MILWAUKEE — Nolan Arenado was a big hit with the Colorado Springs Sky Sox Saturday night, going 2-for-4 with two RBIs and a run scored. By all accounts it was a successful first rehab start for the Rockies’ Gold Glove third baseman.

Arenado is on track to rejoin the Rockies on Thursday when they open a 10-game homestand by hosting the Dodgers. He said he would like about 25 at-bats in Triple-A to get ready for his return to the majors.

Hey, Walt Weiss, is there any chance Arenado comes back before then? Perhaps for part of the three-game series that begins in Washington D.C. on Monday?

“If he gets two hits and two RBIs every night on his rehab assignment, I’ll push for it,” the manager quipped Sunday before the Rockies took on the Brewers at Miller Park.

It’s not likely that the Rockies would cut short Arenado’s rehab stint, but it’s not impossible.

“We got a good report on Nolan,” Weiss said. “He looked really good, a couple of hits, a couple of RBIs. You never know how a guy is going to show up after missing that much time, but he showed up really good last night.”

Arenado sustained a mallet fracture to his middle left finger while sliding headfirst into second base in the Rockies’ 3-2 loss May 23 at Atlanta. He was placed on the disabled list the next day. The Rockies are 9-24 during in his absence.

Saturday night, Arenado flagged down a hard liner off the bat of the Iowa Cubs’ Josh Vitters to end the Cubs’ third inning, and later made a nice play on Vitters’ grounder to end the seventh.

“I didn’t get as many (chances at third) as you would like, but I got that last (play) that was tough, and it was great,” Arenado told MLB.com. “It felt fine and didn’t hurt my finger. Even when I hit (the double) to left, there was no pain at all.”

Pregame notes of note:

* The Rockies will continue to monitor right-handed starter Jhoulys Chacin, who is worried about his lack of fastball velocity after getting lit up by the Brewers in a 7-4 loss Saturday.

“I really don’t know what’s wrong with my arm. I can’t get strong,” the right-hander said after most of his fastballs arrived at the plate at about 86 mph. “Even if I throw extra hard, I can get one (pitch), but then I can’t throw the next one hard.”

Said Weiss: “We have been looking at it. We are seeing the same thing. The ball is maybe not coming out of his hand like we are used to seeing. He’s such a tough kid that he’s finding a way to compete without his best stuff.”

* Drew Stubbs is getting increased playing time in center field and he’s producing at the plate, too. He went 3-for-4 with a double and an RBI Saturday, and he’s hitting .316 with five home runs, 10 doubles, two triples and 17 RBIs since May 1.