WASHINGTON — The Republican general is blinking.

The government crisis appears close to over because House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) looked over the cliff and saw failure.

Bowing to a Tea Party minority’s tyranny, Boehner shut the government and increased the chance of a crippling debt default. He drew a line and may now have to step on it like some child crunching wet sand castles on the beach.

A half-million federal workers are furloughed because the House GOP insisted on trying to defund or delay Obamacare. It also wanted big spending cuts before raising our borrowing limit.

They’ve gotten zilch. They may get something down the line but that's a fat “maybe.” The adults in the U.S. Senate have worked out a tentative agreement, which hopefully will be finalized Tuesday.

The latest polling shows 74% of Americans disapprove of what Republicans were doing, compared to 61% negatives for Democrats and 53% for President Obama (pictured). (T.J. Kirkpatrick/Bloomberg)

For now, the politicians have listened belatedly to average Americans and raised a white flag.

The latest polling shows 74% of us disapprove of what the GOP was doing. That compares to 61% negatives for Democrats and 53% for President Obama.

Boehner can say he fought a good fight and took his headstrong troops right to the brink. He can perhaps claim that the firebrands got Obama to discuss spending somewhere down the road. They can all battle again when the next artificial deadline arrives in January.

All hell can still break loose with the GOP. The Tea Party diehards have not played by traditional rules up to now. We’ll know for sure Tuesday.

An agreement over the government shutdown and the possible debt default is expected to be finalized Tuesday. (MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images)

As for the White House and Democrats, they might want to resist the temptation to rub the GOP’s noses in all this.

If Boehner caves, they should do the un-Washington thing: accept victory with grace and move on.

Maybe both sides can then transact some actual business on our behalf.