Pfizer’s flirtation with Allergan, which may not come to fruition, could represent a return to American drug makers’ strategy of finding a base overseas. Allergan’s headquarters are technically in Dublin, and Pfizer had made an earlier run at AstraZeneca in London.

Why the Urge to Merge?

Low interest rates and cheap capital are fueling merger activity across many industries, but health care is especially devoted to the mantra that bigger is always better. And there are both the short-term goal of increasing revenue and the longer-term need to restructure in response to changes in the health care landscape under the Affordable Care Act. Unlike other areas, like telecommunications, where a tremendous amount of consolidation has already occurred, health care has been fragmented, with many smaller players.

All of the parties are under intense pressure to reduce costs, and consolidation is seen as necessary to do so, especially among smaller entities like hospitals. “There is serious economy of scale to be accomplished,” said Dr. Kaveh Safavi, the managing director for Accenture’s global health practice.

Hospitals continue to join forces to create a larger presence in their markets or regional systems. In New Jersey, for example, in July, Barnabas Health and Robert Wood Johnson Health System. announced plans to combine. That will create the state’s largest hospital network, with 11 hospitals. Hospitals have also been buying physician groups.

“Scale matters,” said Mark Claster, a partner at Carl Marks Advisors who specializes in hospital mergers and is chairman of the board for North Shore-LIJ Health System, which is renaming itself Northwell Health.

Hospitals are looking for the size and clout necessary to negotiate with insurance companies, he said, but they are also preparing for changes in how they are paid in which they assume financial risk for how much it costs to care for patients.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Hospitals are also supersizing so they can invest more in technology and computer systems that allow them to better track patients’ care.

While many of the recent acquisitions involve hospitals combining with hospitals, Dr. Safavi of Accenture predicted that future activity would focus more on hospitals buying medical specialty groups , adding clinics or even acquiring digital health companies that may specialize in giving people in remote locations access to doctors. Accenture predicts the share of hospital-hospital mergers will fall to about 6 percent of transactions by 2018, from 21 percent in 2014.

Politics aside, the Affordable Health Care Act is credited with accelerating the pace of change. Many of the pressures to combine existed before the law was passed, but it has forced health insurers and hospitals to try to reduce costs.

What Does This Mean to Patients?

Consumer advocates and others worry that some of the big deals, including those being proposed by large for-profit health insurers, will not benefit consumers. They say competition could decline significantly in some businesses, like private Medicare plans, and in some local markets where there may already be one or two powerful players. Consumers may pay more because, without competitors, insurers could raise premiums or hospitals could raise prices.

In many cases, however, the acquisitions, are likely to be under regulators’ radar said Leemore S. Dafny, a former regulator who is now a professor at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University. This could especially be the case if they are not two hospital groups joining forces but a health system adding another cardiology group or buying a home health business in its market, she said. Little information may be available about the impact of these deals on a market, she said, and she predicted that antitrust concerns would not stop much of the consolidation.

Are Regulators Giving the All-Clear Signal?

Any large transaction is going to get a careful regulatory review by federal and state officials. The Justice Department is looking at the insurance mergers, and the Federal Trade Commission has scrutinized some of the hospital mergers, including one in which a hospital system acquired a physician practice.

“The big question for regulators is, Where does that leave consumers and purchasers like employers?” said Ceci Connolly, managing director of PwC’s Health Research Institute. “It’s an open question.”

But certain types of deals, especially those that create behemoths, could run afoul of government officials, she warned. “There’s the potential for backlash,” she said, not unlike the federal government’s reaction to the spate of tax inversion mergers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If regulators take firm action against these deals, “it would be a splash of cold water,” Ms. Connolly said, and might dissuade other entities from pursuing similar acquisitions.

Will This Merger Frenzy Continue?

The short answer is yes. Drug makers, hospitals and health insurers, drugstore chains and pharmacy benefit managers are all seeking to bulk up to gain more leverage in negotiating with the other sides.

While the overall state of the economy and other factors could curb the enthusiasm for deals, health care are likely to continue because of the Affordable Care Act and the resultant pressure to deliver better care at lower prices. Mergers beget more mergers, as hospitals seek to keep up with their rivals down the street, and everyone looks for more power in negotiations with payers.

“Our view from the ground is that the pace will continue,” said Torrey McClary, a lawyer for Hogan Lovells who specializes in mergers. “Nobody is sitting still. Everybody in the industry is thinking hard about their next move.”