KALAMAZOO, MI -- Throughout my childhood, we would occasionally visit my father's two maiden aunts, Aunt Ree and Aunt Maddie.





Marie Ayres was a secretary at University of Michigan. She was also caretaker to Madeline, her younger sister by 16 years.





In the early 1940s, when Maddie was a young woman engaged to be married, she was stricken by tuberculosis. Part of her lungs were removed and what remained was so badly scarred that the engagement was called off and Maddie spent the next three decades as an invalid tethered to oxygen tanks.





It's not an unusual family story for someone of my generation or older. My husband's mother was stricken by TB during The Depression and temporarily moved from Michigan to New Mexico to heal her lungs. A friend spent months in a TB sanatorium as a little boy. Another friend says TB turned her mother from an active tomboy to a frail, sickly woman.





Indeed, a century ago, tuberculosis was the leading cause of death in the United States, according to the National Institute of Health. Another name for TB was "consumption," because the disease seemed to consume its victims, causing them to literally waste away.







It is "so common that more than half the population of American cities like Kalamazoo tested positive for the infection," although many people never had symptoms, my former colleague, Bill Krasean, wrote in a 1992 Kalamazoo Gazette health column.





Today, of course, TB is such a rare disease that a case reported this past week at Kalamazoo Central High Schoo l threw parents and students into an uproar.





The fact a single case is now a big news story shows how times have changed, said Lynn Houghton, a local historian who has researched the history of tuberculosis in Kalamazoo.





"A hundred years ago, this was such a major, major issue," Houghton said.





One reason was the lack of effective treatment. Another was that tuberculosis flourished in urban environments of the 19th and early 20th century, when malnutrition was widespread, as were overcrowded living environments that lacked proper sunlight, heating and ventilation. People also were acquiring a type of TB from drinking raw milk or unpasteurized dairy products.





Around 1906, Kalamazoo residents created an "anti-tuberculosis society." The prescribed cure for TB at that point was a healthy diet and fresh air, so a "tent city" was created on Gull Road for TB patients, who were charged $7 a week, she said.





"They were suppose to be outside 10 to 12 hours a day, 12 months a year," Houghton said, and the tent city had TB patients "literally living in tents."





Around the same time, quack cures for TB proliferated, Houghton said. One such business in Kalamazoo was the Yonkerman Co., founded by a veterinarian who marketed an elixir called Pturbercolozyne for the then-princely sum of $10 a bottle.





It turned out to be a mixture of glycerin, water, burnt sugar and almond oil.





"This was way before the FDA," Houghton said.





Around the start of World War I, the Fairmont sanatorium opened on North Prairie Street in Kalamazoo's Douglas neighborhood, Houghton said. In addition to TB patients, the sanatorium also took in those suffering from smallpox and diphtheria, "the major contagious diseases of the time," Houghton said.





Fairmont was a government facility, but there also were private facilities, including Pine Crest Sanitorium in Oshtemo Township near Ninth Street, which at one point had 30 buildings spread over 61 acres near Ninth Street, Houghton said. Pine Crest was purchased by the state in 1944, which operated it for another 10 years. Today, that site is Flesher Field, a township park that includes soccer fields and a disc golf course.





Pine Crest closed when the state built the four-story, 200-bed Southwestern Michigan Tuberculosis Sanatorium atop of a hill on Blakeslee Street, not far from the old Fairmont facility.





Ironically, the new sanatorium opened in 1954 just as medical and public health advances were bringing TB under control. Between the introduction of antibiotics, improved diet and living conditions, and the increasing use of pasteurized milk, infection rates were plummeting.





In May 1953, only two days after reporting on construction progress of the new sanatorium, the Kalamazoo Gazette reported "tuberculosis dropped out of the ten leading causes of death for the first time in the state's history."





There still were enough TB patients to initially fill the Southwest Michigan TB Sanatorium. But over time, the stat e began filling some of the beds with mental health patients. In 1969, the sanatorium was converted to the Northwest Unit of Kalamazoo Regional Psychiatric Hospital.





KPPH vacated the building in 1990 and it was finally torn down in 2011. The property is now the site of a new apartment complex, Prairie Gardens, for low-income seniors; the first residents moved in a year ago.





Meanwhile, the number of TB cases have continued to fall. Nowadays, Kalamazoo County typically has fewer than five cases a year, health officials say. Last year, there were 141 cases in all of Michigan, with only a handful of deaths. One reason: County health departments use aggressive strategies to contain outbreaks, including hand-delivering antibiotics daily to the home of TB patients and watching them take the medication.





TB remains a scourge in the Third World. It's estimated a third of the global population tests positive for TB and "the numbers are over 90 percent in the developing world," according to a history of TB published by news-medical.net





In the United States, "TB sounds like something from a century ago. But it still exists," Linda Vail, health officer of the Kalamazoo County Health and Community Services Department, said at a press conference Thursday.





But these days in the U.S., Vail said, TB "sounds scary, but it's not that scary. ... It's a very treatable disease."





Julie Mack covers K-12 education and writes a column for Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter at kzjuliemack.