For some readers this may sound like hyperbole. But for those people who lose their children and family members, it is all too real. I watched two family members die because they couldn’t get proper HIV/AIDS health care. I remember when ACT UP staged die-ins to call attention to the epidemic.

x YouTube Video

Today, Black Lives Matter activists and young people they have inspired stage die-ins across the nation—in the streets, in government buildings and on college campuses. They are protesting systemic racism, police brutality, and a criminal injustice system that is killing us.

x YouTube Video

Activists from the Moral Mondays Movement in North Carolina have also staged die-ins. They are fighting for the lives of those who will die because Republican Gov. Pat McCrory and the Republican-controlled legislature have refused Medicaid expansion.

Moral Mondays protesters in North Carolina carry cutouts of tombstones for a "die-in" outside the North Carolina State Capitol



“The denial of Medicaid expansion is a form of political and social violence. People are literally dying who don't have to die, simply because extremists in the legislatures and governor's mansions across the South and even here in North Carolina refuse to expand Medicaid, which is morally indefensible," state NAACP President Rev. William Barber said in a statement.



They will be marching on Raleigh again this coming February 13—fighting for the right to live.

Take a look at the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) map of the current status of Medicaid Expansion.

How many people in the orange states on this map will die, or face life-threatening illnesses with no health care simply because their elected officials don’t give a damn?

To ensure these anti-life policies, Republicans are also killing our votes—voting rights that we paid for in blood.

“The right to vote is the most powerful nonviolent tool we have in a democracy. I risked my life defending that right. Some died in the struggle. If we are ever to actualize the true meaning of equality, effective measures such as the Voting Rights Act are still a necessary requirement of democracy.”

-Congressman John Lewis

Voter suppression enables Republicans to enact and maintain their deadly policies.

In 2016, 10 states will be putting into place restrictive voting laws that they will be enforcing for the first time in a presidential election. These laws range from new hurdles to registration to cutbacks on early voting to strict voter identification requirements. Collectively, these ten states are home to over 80 million people and will wield 129 of the 270 electoral votes necessary to win the presidency.

The same way that Moral Mondays reclaimed the high ground from the right-wing “Moral Majority,” Democrats need to reclaim the concept of being pro-life.

Because the reality is, we are pro-life.

And death is the specialty of Republicans.