BROOK PARK, Ohio -- Is this a great idea or what? Get Moving Mondays, a before school walking program for Ford Intermediate School students is under way. The students can earn foot charms and toe tokens for walking so many steps or miles.

So far, 69 students have signed up and Coordinator, Donell Bichara, anticipates more may join. Bichara is the Community Specialist Liaison for MetroHealth Middleburg Heights November Family Health Center, which is the proud sponsor of Get Moving Mondays.

April Audie, one of the physical education teachers, is the school coordinator who worked with Bichara to get the program going. There are a couple staff that are getting involved by participating in the program for exercise and spending time with the students.

Bichara said, "Get Moving Mondays would not be possible without the support of Principal, Mike Pellegrino and April Audie who have embraced and encouraged this program for the well-being of their students."

The importance for young people with walking is getting the body moving for weight management, reducing diabetes risk or control diabetes in those who have it, controlling blood pressure, improving sleep, socialization, maintenance of muscles and joints, better academic performance and developing exercise habits now for life-long health.

Bichara said the more walking that can be done in addition to gym classes and other forms of exercise outside of school, just increases the students health benefits.

MetroHealth's mission is "leading the way to a healthier you and a healthier community through service, teaching, discovery and teamwork." The Ford "Get Moving Mondays" program embodies the MetroHealth mission.

Advent programs begin at Redeemer: The Rev. Michael D. Oakley, pastor of Redeemer Lutheran Church, 6151 Smith Road, tells us there will be a First Sunday Learning and Fellowship Event after the 10 a.m. worship Dec. 6. The theme is Hearth and Home. "As the days grow darker in Advent, light another candle. As the days grow colder in Advent, warm your heart.

"Come home to the light and warmth of THE Redeemer at RLC," Rev. Oakley said "We will have a fire in the courtyard after 10 a.m. worship with marshmallows, hot dogs, cider, hot chocolate and carols. We will be constructing luminaries and cutting out paper snowflakes. Invite your family, friends and neighbors." For more information on this and other programs, email redeemerchurch@RLCBP.com or visit www.RLCBP.com.

A busy year is coming to an end: The City of Brook Park's Senior Club has been very busy this year, with a goal to give to others who are less fortunate. The year started by collecting more than 200 pairs of new socks, suitable for men, woman, or children. Our seniors were so generous. The socks were delivered to St. Colman's Church in Cleveland and Redeemer Crisis Center.

Keeping others warm and loved was the next project. 25 fleece blankets, handmade by the club will be given to the children at Providence House.

Then Audrey's Outreach Center said they were short on peanut butter, well the Brook Park Seniors came through again! They collected 60 jars of peanut butter -- and one jelly.

The club participates in a lot of fun projects too. Members made painted T-shirts, mostly for their grandchildren.

A beautiful Christmas Basket was donated to the club, and they decided to sell chances mad collected $85 which will be given to Audrey's Outreach Center in Brook Park.

This year's meetings are coming to an end. At 10 a.m. Dec. 9, the seniors will hold an in-house auction at the Community Center, 17400 Holland Road. And on Dec. 16, the annual members-only Christmas party will be held. Cost is $5 and entertainment will be provided by fiddler, Jim Kelley. For information about the club or 2015 programs, contact Mary Ann LaQuatra, Assistant Deputy Director of the Office of Aging or Joan Corrigan, senior coordinator at 216-433-4136.

A great lunch will mark the holidays: The Brook Park Chamber of Commerce Holiday Luncheon will be held form 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. Dec. 9 at Mise en Place at Polaris Career Center, 7285 Old Oak Boulevard (just past Southwest General Health Center). Chef Chris Olszweski and students will prepare a delicious meal for members who are invited to reserve a table and bring their office staffs to celebrate the holiday and support the Brook Park Chamber of Commerce.

Cost is $25 per person with $2 donated to SCAN Hunger Center. There will be door prizes and raffle items, as well. Call Sharon Zimmer at 216-898-9755 or email her at bpchamber@sbcglobal.net to make your reservations by Dec. 5.

Get help with health insurance: The Brook Park Library will be hosting Affordable Care Act Enrollment Assistance from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. through February. Representatives from Cognosante will be available to assist customers at the library, 6155 Engle Road. For information, call 216-267-5250 or visit www.cuyahogalibrary.org.

Holiday hours are announced: The SCAN Hunger Center food pantry 85 South Rocky River Drive, Berea as adjusted hours for this month. You can stop in from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Dec. 12 and 4-7 p.m. Dec. 19. Normal hours will resume in January. SCAN serves Berea, Brook Park, Columbia Township, Middleburg Heights, Olmsted Township, Olmsted Falls and Strongsville.

Contact Boyer at samboyersunnews@yahoo.com.