Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

One-third of Americans want to impeach President Barack Obama.

Although many Republican leaders, like House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), think there are no grounds for impeachment, or just not enough evidence to convict, the group that supports impeachment thinks there is more than enough evidence ranging from the IRS scandal, to the Benghazi attack, to Fast and Furious, to various instances of government overreach and violations of the Constitution with executive orders.

I believe they’ve all got it wrong. The perfect impeachment charge isn’t any of those. It isn’t even the soon-to-be-charge of violating the Constitution by giving amnesty to millions of illegal aliens through executive order (rumored to be coming within 30 days).

The perfect impeachment charge is FRAUD.

President Obama committed fraud when he knowingly lied, “If you like your insurance, you can keep it” and “If you like your doctor, you can keep him” and “Your insurance premiums will not go up.” There is no question Obama knew they were lies when he said them.

AND THAT IS CLEARLY CONSUMER FRAUD!

This crime has 300 million witnesses. This crime was recorded on television dozens of times. This crime is easy to prove. You can add in all the other scandals, frauds, and lies as Articles of Impeachment two through 10, but Article number one is the Obamacare lies.

And here’s the important part – this crime resonates with the average American. This crime hits home – it’s costing them dearly (in the pocketbook), and also some with their lives (cancer patients who have lost their insurance). Americans already talk about this crime in their living room and around the kitchen table.

This crime is simple, easy to prove, and easy for the average American to understand. Obama knowingly used fraud, lies, misrepresentation and coercion (by the IRS) to induce Americans to support Obamacare, knowing if he told the truth they would never support it. We the citizens of America are victims of a massive criminal conspiracy. The man at the center of this world-class fraud is Barack Obama.

If you have any doubt this was a criminal act, let’s compare the crimes committed by Obama to those of convicted TV infomercial conman, Kevin Trudeau. Remember him? His 30-minute infomercials ran day and night on cable TV for the past decade. This past February, Obama’s own administration convicted and sentenced Trudeau to 10 years in federal prison for knowingly making untrue statements about a weight loss book he was selling.

I don’t question whether Trudeau is a fraud. I’m sure he got what was coming to him. But Trudeau is a small time crook compared to our president. Obama scammed millions of Americans out of their health insurance, raised prices dramatically (thereby damaging and bankrupting the middle class), killed millions of jobs (ask the Congressional Budget Office about that one) and arguably contributed to a number of deaths (with many more to come).

In my new book, “The Murder of the Middle Class,” I made the prediction that we’d soon hear about sick Americans who died because of Obamacare.

The wait is over. Linda Rolain, a Las Vegas woman, lost her battle last month to brain cancer after a three-month delay due to the faulty design of the Nevada Obamacare exchange.

The government accused Trudeau of lying and exaggerating to sell his weight loss book. Their argument is that he called weight loss “easy” on TV… but then when you actually read the book you found out it’s pretty hard to lose weight. The government argued without the lies, he couldn’t have sold the book and that is fraud.

Isn’t that exactly how Obama sold Obamacare? He knowingly lied again and again. He painted a picture of 30 million new patients, but no cost increases. As a matter of fact, he claimed costs would be reduced. He relied on words like “free”… “no cost”… “prices will go down”… “the debt will go down”… “no jobs will be lost”…and “Obamacare will help the economy.”

All lies, and he knew it all along – pure fraud.

The kind of fraud that results in long prison sentences for private sector CEOs.

The biggest whopper of all: “If you like your insurance you can keep it.” He told this lie while his own internal White House reports showed that up to 93 million Americans would lose their insurance because of Obamacare.

Obama told the middle class a lie to sell his product, because he knew if he told the truth, no one would buy it. How does that differ from Trudeau?

Like Trudeau, Obama could never have sold Obamacare to the American people without lying and misrepresenting. But Obama’s fraud didn’t cost us $30 each. Obama’s fraud is costing each of us thousands of dollars per year. Obama’s fraud may add up to the first-ever trillion dollar scam. Bernie Madoff get out of the way: Obama is arguably the biggest thief in world history.

And some of us will lose our lives because of his fraud. Ask Rolain’s family about that.

If Kevin Trudeau deserves 10 years in prison, shouldn’t Obama receive a life sentence for the fraud he’s committed?

While it is my personal belief that Obamacare was always the centerpiece of Obama’s purposeful plan to murder the middle class and kill capitalism, there is no possible doubt that legally and constitutionally, the lies told by Obama (on camera) to sell Obamacare are an impeachable offense.

Postscript: Days ago, the health insurance policy for my family of six was cancelled by Aetna, who blamed the cancellation on the mandates of Obamacare. Under President Obama, my health insurance premium has gone from $500 per month to $1,700 per month. Now it is cancelled.

I can personally testify as to the fraud committed. I am a witness to the murder of the middle class. Obama must pay. If no business is too big to fail, I think we can all agree that no political leader is too big to jail.

It’s time for impeachment.

Wayne’s latest book is: “The Murder of the Middle Class”. It will be released on July 14, 2014. Wayne Allyn Root is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, successful entrepreneur, small business defender, business speaker, Capital Evangelist, and media personality- appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past 5 years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.