Boulder outdoor gear company American Rec, acquired in April, embraces change

Brett Jordan, former CEO of American Rec, now president of Exxel Outdoor in Boulder. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Earlier this year, Boulder-based American Rec — holders of such iconic outdoor brands as Kelty, Wenzel and Sierra Designs, among others — was acquired by Exxel Outdoors, an L.A. company founded in 1997 by Harry Kazazian and Armen Kouleyan.

The new company, headquartered at 6235 Lookout Rd., announced big plans at the time for expanded U.S. manufacturing at its Huntsville, Ala., facility, which currently produces sleeping bags for mass market buyers such as Walmart.

We checked in with president Brett Jordan, a CU grad, to see how things were going since the acquisition:

It's been a little over four months since the buyout. What's new?

Not much, yet. We're still in the process of figuring out the acquisition and the move.

But it's been a really complementary merger. We were both surprised at how well the two company's needs fit with each other.

So the company is now Exxel Outdoors, but they moved the headquarters here, to American Rec's Boulder offices. Why is that?

Harry and Armen recognized that what runs any business is great people, and there are great people here. Even though they were buying American Rec, they chose to reverse integrate into American Rec and move to Boulder.

So this is still a Boulder company?

Absolutely.

We've been under private equity ownership for the last six or seven years. We always knew there was going to be a next chapter, so for us, this acquisition and subsequent merger has been a tremendous opportunity.

Advertisement

As we look into the future, it's all about opportunities to bring more business into the area through acquisitions, to add jobs to the Boulder area. It can have a ripple effect that is tremendously positive.

One of the goals of the merger was increased U.S. manufacturing. Have you made any moves on that front?

The Alabama factory can produce 2.5 million sleeping bags in a single shift. It does mostly sleeping bags, but there are other categories that can work — tents, packs and so on.

The issue is that we are at capacity with our current facilities, so we are looking at potentially expanding those in the future.

Are you looking to expand internationally?

We do supply to Canada and Mexico, but we always look at the U.S. market first. I constantly have to remind our team that we have huge market share potential in front of us in the U.S. We still have such a long runway here.

There are not a lot of companies making product in the U.S. anymore, so it's a tremendous advantage to have that capability. Most people have dismissed that the American worker can compete, but with a little ingenuity, we have proven that we can be competitive.

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle