Hoda Kotb, left, and Kathie Lee Gifford on the set of the "Today" show. (Photo: Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY)

It's just after 10 a.m. on Presidents Day as Today show co-hosts Kathie Lee Gifford and Hoda Kotb play Russian roulette with vodka and water shots to honor our Olympic athletes.

"You set a wonderful example for the children home today from school," Kathie Lee laughs as Kotb knocks back a shot that turns out to be vodka.

Like much of the fourth hour on the morning show, the drinking is all in good fun. Just as it is every other day as the two women sit behind their giant wine goblets.

But some people don't find it funny. Especially not people such as recovering alcoholic Ann Dowsett Johnston, whose recent book chronicles a disturbing trend in alcohol abuse among women, particularly those of college age.

"I'm no prohibitionist, but I don't laugh about it," says Johnston, former vice principal of Canada's McGill University and author of Drink: The Intimate Relationship Between Women and Alcohol. "We're looking at the normalization of risky drinking. Drinking in the morning is not healthy."

Johnston's book came out last fall as people began to enroll in new Affordable Care Act insurance plans that would, for the first time, have to include coverage for drug and alcohol treatment. That treatment has to be equal to the cost sharing and benefit plans provided for other medical issues.

As I reported this week, addiction treatment centers say insurers have gotten tougher about how much they'll cover, often approving just a few days at a time when the center says a month or more is required.

Though there's little agreement on what legally required addiction treatment parity means, there's one thing researchers can agree on: Women, especially Millennials, are getting more like men when it comes to alcohol abuse.

Twenty-five percent of all men binge-drink, and 24% of women 18 to 24 do so, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced last year. (Binge drinking is defined as five or more drinks for men or four or more for women in two hours.)

Such a cause for celebration.

Diane Schiraldi, 55, practiced something Johnston writes is common among college women — "drunkorexia" — drinking without eating to heighten the buzz and/or cut calories. It took 45 days of inpatient treatment last year to get the Fort Lauderdale patient care worker sober.

"I didn't have any kind of clarity on what boundaries were," she says.

Who could blame her? Even if they haven't taken up drinking at their toddlers' play dates, it's become common practice for moms to drink wine while making, eating and even cleaning up after dinner, Johnston says.

Against this backdrop, Orlando mental health and addiction counselor Vicki O'Grady became so outraged by NBC's morning show saucing, she started a Facebook page called "Kathie Lee Gifford and Hoda Kotb: Please Stop Drinking on the Today Show."

In a Today.com article in August, the co-hosts explained the thinking behind their drinking. Gifford said they often just take a sip or two of wine, adding that those goblets serve as props. Kotb said she wants people to "know you can have a party any hour of the day." Gifford joked to New York magazine, "Well, I'm drunk when I get there, so I don't really see what the big deal is."

A recovering alcoholic and bulimic, O'Grady worries the TV hosts give women, young and old, an unofficial OK to crack open a bottle before lunch.

Viewers, she says, will think, "Well, if they can do it, then there's nothing wrong that I do it every day at 10."

O'Donnell, a USA TODAY reporter for 20 years, covers health care and safety issues.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1iCbl5B