The numbers are eye-popping. Student loan debt in the U.S. stands at $1.1 trillion, with a current rate of default approaching 15 percent for loans within three years of beginning repayment.

What’s scary is that you don’t need an exorbitant loan balance to face financial hardship. The highest rate of late payments is among borrowers with outstanding loans of less than $5,000, says Beth Akers, a fellow at the Brookings Institution.

Clearly, the current college-financing system is in need of repair, if not outright overhaul. Here are three out-of-the-box proposals to fix the student loan market over the long term.

Streamline repayment: Replace the bewildering array of existing options for repaying federal loans with a single, income-based plan, says economics professor Daniel Kreisman, of Georgia State University. After leaving college, borrowers would be automatically enrolled in the program.

Your employer would deduct a fraction of your paycheck to apply toward the debt (you’d check a box on your W-4 form if you have a loan to repay), starting at 3 percent on the first $10,000 of income and rising as earnings increase, to a cap of 10 percent. Interest rates would fluctuate with market rates, and your contributions would stop when the loan was repaid or after 25 years.

Drawback: The plan could stretch out the typical 10-year payback period, increasing the amount of interest paid.

Give colleges skin in the game: Schools already lose access to federal aid if their students’ default rates soar. But some experts want colleges to pay as much as 20 percent of the losses incurred on bad loans at their school. Sharing the risk puts more of the onus on schools to keep academic standards high and ensure students’ success.

Drawback: Schools that serve high-risk populations might be unfairly penalized.

Let investors foot the bill: Income-sharing agreements, or ISAs, give investors the right to a slice of a student’s future earnings for a fixed period. Lest you think that all the money would go to Harvard financiers, consider that you’d expect abundant funding at, say, a community college with ties to area employers and a strong vocational bent.

The beauty of this human-capital market is that it alerts prospective students to high-quality, low-cost programs, says Vanderbilt finance professor Miguel Palacios, cofounder of Lumni, one of a few firms making such deals. Regulatory uncertainty about ISAs are for now their biggest hurdle.

Drawback: Fields of study deemed valuable by society but not necessarily lucrative might find it hard to tap the ISA market.

Anne Kates Smith,

Kiplinger’s Personal Finance