A tasty treat. Julie Bordner is looking for your votes. Not for an elected office, but for her cake. She is a cake decorator at the Dairy Queen on South Bend Avenue. She is in the second round of a DQ cake decorating competition called the Iron Tip and she wants to make it to the finals in Honolulu in January.

And who would blame her for that one?

Half of the vote comes from Facebook. So go to Facebook.com/dairyqueen to place a vote for Julie. Voting continues through Sept. 15.

Julie has been in the cake competition before and has made it through the first rounds. This time she really wants to go to Hawaii. "Hawaii -- that is better than San Antonio," she said jokingly. The Texas city was the host site for one of the last decorating competitions.

A circus theme was selected by DQ management. Julie's cake has a clown, bags of peanuts and cotton candy, and three decorated animals. Julie has decorated cakes for more than 20 years and is known for inventiveness. She is the Monet of frosting.

***

It was a big surprise for Shalena Jackson, of South Bend. To celebrate her 20 years at La Petite Academy in South Bend, the staff gave her a party. It was a complete surprise. Shalena said she thought it was a meeting until she saw family, friends and former students in the room.

Nearly 30 people were present to toast the preschool teacher and her love of children.

Emily Higgingbotham, program director at La Petite, said it is very rare for someone to stay in child care for that many years.

Shalena was presented with a rocking chair that carried the message "here's to rockin' another 20 years." The chair went home along with some great memories of a great day.

***

Ethan Shelton has made the big time, again. As everyone probably knows, Ethan is the founder of Shelton's Farm Market in Niles. He turned 110 on July 10. On Aug. 20, his birthday was mentioned on an NBC "Today Show" spot with Willard Scott.

Willard's birthday salutes started in the 1980s.

Ethan received lots of attention for the birthday -- newspapers and TV. His great-grandson, Nick, used the wonders of social media and Facebook to get up a campaign to have him featured on the morning news show. "The farm market has 5,000 followers and we had more than 40,000 views."

Nick said he received a call from Willard Scott's people that great-grandpa would be on the Aug. 13 show, or shortly thereafter. No show on Aug. 13, so Nick and others recorded the show every day until the spot ran. His general opinion was, "It was pretty cool."

Nick was going to double-check with his uncle, Joe Shelton to make sure great-grandpa saw it.

Great-grandson added that great-grandpa is in good shape and, as a matter of fact, played golf recently.

"He had a good round and sunk a 32-foot putt. My goal is to follow in his footsteps. His key to a long life is to chew slowly and eat turnip greens. It is definitely a blessing to have him," Nick said.