Clinical Nurse Specialists Add Unique Value to Healthcare Organizations

AACN Advanced Critical Care journal publishes series with examples of how clinical nurse specialists contribute to optimal patient care and improve fiscal operations of healthcare institutions

Add to Favorites

Contact Information Available for logged-in reporters only

Citations AACN Advanced Critical Care, Jan-Mar 2015

Newswise — The expertise of clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) adds value to healthcare organizations, and these advanced practice nurses have become critical contributors in improving healthcare delivery, according to a series of articles in the current issue of AACN Advanced Critical Care.

In its January-March 2015 issue, the peer-reviewed journal features a symposium collection of four articles with specific examples of how CNSs contribute to the delivery of optimal care to patients and the fiscal operations of healthcare institutions.

CNSs are licensed registered nurses with graduate nursing degrees at the master’s or doctoral level in a specialty. With approximately 72,000 CNSs practicing nationwide, they represent the second largest number of advanced practice nurses in the United States.

Since the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and publication of the Institute of Medicine’s “The Future of Nursing”, CNSs and other advanced practice nurses have achieved greater recognition for their contributions to addressing today’s healthcare challenges.

CNSs often lead initiatives to improve patient outcomes, but they also evaluate clinical interventions and processes to ensure best practice standards and patient safety. Their efforts can contribute to decreased lengths of stay, optimized patient safety, improved patient outcomes and cost avoidance. They also mentor staff nurses in evidence-based practice and professional presentation opportunities.

Journal editor Mary Fran Tracy, RN, PhD, CCNS, FAAN, compiled the articles for the issue, which include:

• Role of the CNS in Improving Patient Outcomes After Cardiac Surgery

• Using a Scorecard to Demonstrate CNS’ Contributions

• Role of the CNS in the Journey to Magnet Recognition

• CNS Regulation: The Maryland Experience

“Clinical nurse specialists are uniquely prepared to improve the care of patient populations - whether in acute and critical care settings, the ambulatory/clinic setting or in the transition of patients between settings,” Tracy said. “This series helps demonstrate their valuable contributions to healthcare leaders, staff and patients.”

AACN Advanced Critical Care is a quarterly, peer-reviewed publication of in-depth articles intended for experienced critical care and acute care clinicians at the bedside, advanced practice nurses, and clinical and academic educators. Each issue includes a topic-based symposium, feature articles and columns of interest to critical and progressive care clinicians.

The journal is an official publication of the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. Access the issue by visiting the AACN Advanced Critical Care website at

www.aacnadvancedcriticalcare.com.

About AACN Advanced Critical Care: AACN Advanced Critical Care is a quarterly, peer-reviewed publication of in-depth articles intended for experienced critical care and acute care clinicians at the bedside, advanced practice nurses, and clinical and academic educators. An official publication of the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, the journal enjoys a circulation of 4,845 and can be accessed at http://journals.lww.com/aacnadvancedcriticalcare/pages/default.aspx.

About the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses: Founded in 1969 and based in Aliso Viejo, Calif., the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses (AACN) is the largest specialty nursing organization in the world. AACN joins together the interests of more than 500,000 acute and critical care nurses and claims more than 235 chapters worldwide. The organization’s vision is to create a healthcare system driven by the needs of patients and their families in which acute and critical care nurses make their optimal contribution. www.aacn.org; facebook.com/aacnface; twitter.com/aacnme

Reporters: follow Looking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an

Expert Query. follow @Expert_Pitch to receive instant updates via TwitterLooking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an Promote your organization’s experts with Expert Pitch

Comment/Share