He wasn’t awarded a cardinal’s red hat by Pope Francis, but Philadelphia Archbishop Charles Chaput has been able to deliver a news scoop about the Pontiff.

The head of the Roman Catholic Church will come to Philadelphia in September of 2015 for the World Meeting of Families, slated for Sept. 22-27, Chaput said Friday.

“Pope Francis has told me that he is coming: The Pope will be with us Friday and Saturday of that week,” the archbishop told a conference in North Dakota.

Fr. Federico Lombardi, a Vatican spokesman, refused to formally confirm the visit, but hinted broadly that the Pope has said he is “willing” to come to the Philadelphia meeting.

Pope Francis will step into church-state controversy, as well as controversy within his church.

The nation’s conservative bishops, almost all appointed by Pope Benedict XVI, have become vocal critics of America’s social trends. As Archbishop of Denver, Chaput threatened to deny holy communion to Catholic politicians and public figures who hold pro-choice views on abortion.

Liberal Catholics privately cheered when Chaput’s name was not on the list when Francis named his first set of cardinals.

The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops opposed the Affordable Care Act, and bishops have supported lawsuits challenging contraception coverage requirements in women’s health insurance.

In 2012 and 2013, the bishops sponsored a “Fortnight for Freedom” observance aimed at alleged threats to religious liberty in America.

At the same time, socially activist women religious have become outspoken critics of such Catholic Republicans as House Speaker John Boehner and Rep. Paul Ryan for supporting deep cuts in federal social programs. “Nuns on the Bus” tours have aimed at highlighting social inequality in America.

After critiquing “radical feminist themes” in nuns’ ministry, the Vatican assigned Seattle Archbishop J. Peter Sartain to oversee the Leadership Conference of Women Religious and make sisters toe the line.

The nuns have taken sharp exception to the Vatican critique, and recent harsh words from Cardinal Gerhard Muller, the German defender of orthodoxy who heads the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.

At a meeting with the sisters and Sartain in Rome, Muller rebuked the Leadership Conference for giving an award to a feminist theologian, a nun who teaches at Fordham University.