The state's largest insurer announced Tuesday that next year it will not renew health plans that currently cover nearly 500,000 people who buy private health coverage or get it through a small employer, despite encouragement from President Obama and permission from the Christie administration to keep the old plans another year.

"Undoing our work and essentially creating new plans in three weeks has proven to be impossible," Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey spokesman Thomas Vincz said. The plans would still need significant change, and premiums would be "far more expensive" than they are currently, Vincz said.

The impact of Horizon's decision is mitigated, however, by its early-renewal option. If customers in the individual or small-group markets act before the end of the year, they can renew this year's plans for 12 months, although the premiums generally will be higher. It was impossible to determine Tuesday how many people had exercised that option so far, Vincz said.

Meanwhile, Oxford Health Plans — a distant second place in the market, with about 100,000 people covered through small-group plans — reached the opposite decision Tuesday.

The company is "working with our brokers to assist our small group customers in New Jersey who wish to renew their 2013 health care coverage" after Jan. 1, said Mary McElrath-Jones, a spokeswoman for UnitedHealthcare, the parent company. She did not have information about whether the company planned to do the same for its 17,000 customers in the individual market.

The decisions added new complexity to a health insurance market already roiled by the disastrous rollout of the federal marketplace for people in New Jersey who buy their own insurance. With a deadline of Dec. 23 to purchase new coverage that starts on Jan. 1, pressure is mounting on those whose insurance-renewal dates are Jan. 1 to make a decision.

Technical improvements to the federal website, healthcare.gov, have made enrollment smoother "for the vast majority of customers," according to the federal government. The website that was to serve small-business customers has been delayed, and they can continue to use agents and brokers as they have in the past to enroll in health coverage.

Obama urged health plans last month to offer customers the opportunity to renew their 2013 plans next year, after a wave of cancellation notices led to widespread criticism that he had broken his promise that people could keep their coverage if they liked it. He said he would not enforce a requirement of the Affordable Care Act that all plans cover 10 essential health benefits, including maternity care and pediatric dental and vision services.

But other parts of the law were not lifted, such as the ban on annual or lifetime limits on coverage. That made it impossible to continue a popular plan in New Jersey — the "basic and essential" plan — that covered 110,000 people.

Insurance is regulated by states, however, and it was left to individual state insurance commissioners to decide how to respond to Obama's change of direction. Late last month, New Jersey Insurance Commissioner Kenneth Kobylowski said he would allow insurance companies to decide for themselves whether to renew this year's policies in 2014. He said his department would work with the carriers, who must file policy documents and premium rates with the state, if they wished to redesign their policies for next year.

That placed enormous time pressure on the insurance companies, which had been working for three years to comply with the Affordable Care Act by designing new policies and rating systems and setting new premiums.

"To try to turn on a dime is very challenging," said Ward Sanders, president of the New Jersey Association of Health Plans. On the one hand, insurers want to retain their customers. On the other hand, extending the old policies might drive up premiums in 2015 for the new Obamacare policies, because healthier people would tend to stay with less comprehensive policies. UnitedHealthcare does not participate in the federal marketplace for New Jersey, so that would not be a concern for it.

Horizon, which does participate in the federal marketplace, was the first company to announce its decision, after its "in-depth analysis of the feasibility and impact of renewing 2013 policies." AmeriHealth of New Jersey has not yet reached a decision, said Jill Roman, its spokeswoman. Aetna had no announcement yet, its spokeswoman said.

"The timing issue is critical for small employers," said Christine Stearns, vice president of the New Jersey Business & Industry Association. "For employers that are making purchasing decisions by Jan. 1, a lot of them aren't waiting around. … A lot of them are opting for early renewal."

Jeffrey Ingalls, president of Stratford Financial Group in Fairfield, has helped many employer groups assess whether to renew early or purchase one of the new plans created to meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act. "More often than not, when you did your analysis about renewing early," he said, "the vast majority would do better in terms of pricing and benefit coverage by renewing early."

Email: washburn@northjersey.com