Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Fareed Zakaria, Jonah Lehrer, Nic Pizzolatto, Plagiarism, Rick Perlstein, Television, Thomas Ligotti, true detective, Entertainment News

The past week saw two accusations of plagiarism leveled against celebrated works, Rick Perlstein’s new book, “The Invisible Bridge: The Fall of Nixon and the Rise of Reagan,” and the HBO series “True Detective,” created by Nic Pizzolatto. The week also marked the withdrawal from an election campaign of a U.S. senator, John Walsh, D-Mont., following New York Times revelations that he had plagiarized much of his final paper in a master’s degree program at the United States Army War College in 2007.

Plagiarism charges are, obviously, serious — serious enough to scuttle a political career or get a novel yanked from the marketplace (as happened to both “How Opal Mehta Got Kissed, Got Wild, and Got a Life” by Kaavya Viswanathan in 2006 and “Assassin of Secrets” by Q.R. Markham in 2011). Making such an accusation is a dramatic, attention-grabbing move, and it often seems to fill the sails of the accusers with the hot wind of righteous indignation. Comments threads fill up with thrillingly adamant remarks like “It’s wrong. Period. He should be fired immediately and his fields sown with salt” (or the professional equivalent thereof).

What none of this acknowledges is just how commonplace plagiarism charges are, how thin most of the evidence is and how poorly the average person understands the nature of the transgression. Perhaps you have to be a literary journalist or editor to realize that just beneath the surface of conventionally reported news simmers a vast sea of semi-formed resentments, grievances and paranoia about intellectual theft, each believed in wholeheartedly by a handful of crusaders (or maybe just one) yet failing to convince more objective reporters. We’re a plagiarism-obsessed society, partly because we know how much damage we can do to someone’s career and life by accusing them of it, but largely because so many of us don’t really grasp what plagiarism is.

Sen. Walsh’s case meets the simplest and most clear-cut definition of the offense. It happened in an academic context and all such institutions maintain explicit and official policies, detailing what constitutes plagiarism and what penalties will be levied against those who engage in it. Students (even students for advanced degrees) go to school to learn from people who know more than they do, to absorb and contemplate the work of those who have gone before them. For that reason, universities must take pains to draw the line between a well-informed and -sourced work and an unacceptably derivative one, and draw it as finely and as brightly as possible. Walsh copied many passages from many sources, word-for-word, without quotation marks or attribution, a clear violation of any university’s academic standards.

Newspapers and other journalistic institutions, particularly high-profile operations with a great deal invested in their reputation for authoritativeness, have their own, and different, regulations regarding the use of other writers’ work. When, two years ago, Fareed Zakaria, an author and pundit on politics and international affairs for Newsweek, CNN and Time, published a column on gun control in Time, he paraphrased a paragraph from a piece by New Yorker writer Jill Lepore that, in turn, summarized the work of a historian of the subject. The information in Lepore’s paragraph was organized and presented in the same way, but with slightly different wording, and Lepore’s article was not cited. Zakaria apologized, and was suspended by both Time and CNN. After a review of his previous commentary for them, both news organizations concluded that the incident was isolated (some outsiders have suggested that it was the work of a research assistant for the stretched-thin pundit), and reinstated him after six days.

Much greater disgrace awaited the pop-neuroscience writer Jonah Lehrer, who in 2012 was accused of the peculiar misdemeanor of plagiarizing himself. He had recycled material he had already published in a variety of newspapers as blog posts for the New Yorker, as well as in one of his books. Since Lehrer owned the work in question, this might not seem like much of a no-no — and had the reuse occurred in, say, the Huffington Post, most likely no one would have complained. They were his words, after all.

But the New Yorker had hired Lehrer as a staff writer. The magazine is considered a platinum-standard journalistic institution that pays its writers a living wage and therefore has the right to demand complete originality. Lehrer appeared to have broken faith with his employers rather than with the reading public at large — until, that is, Michael C. Moynihan of Tablet magazine discovered that Lehrer had also fabricated quotes, attributed to Bob Dylan, in his book “Imagine.” Shortly thereafter, journalism professor Charles Seife was asked by Wired magazine to scrutinize Lehrer’s work for that publication. He found 22 instances of “recycling,” outright plagiarism of other writers, copying of press releases (somewhat of a gray area, since these are written in the hope that they will be regurgitated by the press) and fabrication. Lehrer’s career crashed and burned.

So even in the upper echelons of journalism, where writers are often required to sign contracts promising to abide by strict ethical standards, the significance of plagiarism is a matter of context. Zakaria erred on a minor scale and had a body of solid, respected work to serve as a counterbalance, so his reputation was quickly redeemed. Lehrer, whose self-plagiarism might go unremarked in other contexts, turned out to have committed the greater journalistic sin of making stuff up and to have inserted all sorts of fishy stuff into his work from the start. His reputation toppled. Ironically, the man in whose mouth Lehrer most liked to place his invented quotes, Bob Dylan, was also found to have plagiarized many passages in his 2004 memoir, “Chronicles, Vol. 1,” from sources as diverse as Time magazine and the profanity-spouting screenwriter Joe Eszterhas. But no one is going to deny the overweening originality of Bob Dylan.

Something else surely figured in the Zakaria affair, even if none of the news organizations or Zakaria himself ever mentioned it, and that is the source of the original plagiarism accusation: a conservative website called Newsbusters. Zakaria had been the target of spurious charges of “stealing” from other right-wing journalists before, such as Jeffrey Goldberg’s allegation that Zakaria “lifted” a quote from Goldberg’s interview with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu; in truth, Zakaria quoted Netanyahu without specifically naming Goldberg as the interviewer. Goldberg’s charge was, of course, a ludicrous reach, taking a pervasive form of journalistic usage (“X said in an interview last week”) and tarting it up as larceny. If Zakaria had been a political compatriot of Goldberg’s it would, no doubt, have passed without notice or comment.

A similar ulterior motive lies behind the accusations of plagiarism leveled against Rick Perlstein by author and consultant Craig Shirley this week. As Salon’s Dave Dayen detailed on Wednesday, Shirley claims that Perlstein infringed on the copyright of his 2005 book, “Reagan’s Revolution: the Untold Story of the Campaign That Started It All.” In letters to Perlstein’s publisher, Simon & Schuster, he demanded, according to the New York Times, “$25 million in damages, a public apology, revised digital editions and the destruction of all physical copies of the book.” The 19 alleged infractions in Perlstein’s 880-page history include citing of historical facts and paraphrasing descriptions of events that Shirley witnessed (and Perlstein didn’t) with attribution. (For a more in-depth account of Shirley’s charges, see Dayen’s excellent piece.)