Hannah Reale back in winning form for Shen track Runner back from injury captures 1,000 at Lady Eagle Invitational

Delmar

Though disappointed to have missed the cross country season with a hip injury, Hannah Reale didn't get discouraged, sticking with her physical therapy program with hopes that better days were ahead.

With the outdoor track season getting into full swing, the early returns on Reale are that the hard work is paying off as the Shenendehowa sophomore was in good form in the 1,000-meter race at the Lady Eagle Invitational on Saturday at Bethlehem High School.

Reale, along with teammate Julia Zachgo, helped set the pace until taking the lead for good at the 400-meter mark before crossing the line in 2 minutes, 55.43 seconds to pick up the win.

"I took it (the lead) with around 600 to go and I had it left in me, everyone was pushing each other to do their best," Reale said. "I love Julia; we work together in workouts. It was awesome to have a teammate right beside you to push you."

Reale was expected to be a prominent member of the highly regarded Shenendehowa cross country team prior to her injury and competed sparingly — mainly on relay teams — throughout the indoor track season.

"It was a disappointment because I was really looking forward to it (cross country season)," Reale said. "It was good to be back out here doing something I love. I think I've gotten a lot stronger. When I was hurt I really worked hard at physical therapy and on my own to strengthen my core just to be back."

Reale's win helped Shen take the team championship.

"Today was a great day. My team and I have been working so hard," Reale said. "It was good to come out and have good weather and run hard."

Colonie junior Amanda Chambers displayed the same sort of devastating finishing kick as Reale when she took control of the 1,500 meters on the last lap and didn't look back. She finished in 4:45.34, four seconds ahead of Shen's Kristina Watrobski.

Chambers helped set the pace of the race throughout as she deviated from her initial game plan.

"I talked about it with my coach (Frank Myers) before and was going to see how I felt with 300 meters to go, and if it felt slow, I'd pick it up," Chambers said. "I kind of forgot about that once I got started, I felt good today. My legs felt good."

Chambers and Watrobski were even with 400 meters to go before Chambers took over, recording her personal-best time in the event, the second time she's lowered her PR this week.

"It was go time," Chambers said. "In the last lap, give it everything you've got, don't have any regrets on the track."

Bethlehem senior Julia Nugent won the 100-meter hurdles and 300 hurdles on her home track.

"I wasn't expecting it, especially the 300," Nugent said. "I don't like the 300. I didn't think I'd be good at it. This gives me a boost of confidence for the early part of the season at least."

Sean Martin, a local freelance writer, is a frequent contributor to the Times Union.