DeAndre Liggins stands accused of beating his girlfriend in front of their 2-year-old child.

"He was quite relieved as you can imagine," said Tony Coleman, the Oklahoma City Attorney representing both Deandre Liggins and Marcus Rogers.

The attorney for a former Thunder basketball player is speaking out, a day after felony charges are dropped against his client, DeAndre Liggins.

Liggins stands accused of beating his girlfriend in front of their 2-year-old child. According to the original court document that was filed, this fight happened inside an Edmond home back in August 2013, but it's the details inside the affidavit that are in question.

"He was quite relieved as you can imagine," said Tony Coleman, the Oklahoma City Attorney representing both Deandre Liggins and Marcus Rogers.

Both were booked into jail last August when the felony charges were first filed.

"This has been an embarrassing situation to say the least," said Coleman.

Court papers filed in September of last year state Liggins got into a verbal argument which led to a physical confrontation with his girlfriend. They state she says he, "grabbed her by the hair" and "threw her to the ground" and "began punching her with a closed fist 11 - 12 times in the head", all in front of their 2-year-old son.

2/13/2014 Related Story: Charges Dropped Against Fornmer Thunder Player DeAndre Liggins

"They admit there were some problems in the relationship," said Coleman.

But now all of that stands in question. Oklahoma County District Attorney David Prater has confirmed the victim in this case, the girlfriend, has left the state, and has since changed her story about what happened.

Prater says she also won't cooperate with prosecution on the felony case. So the felony charges are being dropped. But Prater says he does plan to refile a misdemeanor domestic abuse charge against Liggins.

"It's huge for Mr. Liggins," said Coleman. "Because obviously … these types of charges hanging in the clouds … can substantially interfere with him moving forward."

Liggins is currently playing for the Sioux Falls Skyforce, an NBA Development League team in South Dakota.

And while Liggins no longer lives here, he will be back in the state to face an arraignment on those misdemeanor charges when they're filed.

Liggins attorney says he is extremely grateful with the way the case was handled by the DA and says that Liggins is undergoing counseling.

8/31/2013 Related Story: Thunder Guard Liggins Arrested On Domestic Abuse Charges