As the sparks continue in the Republican campaign known as The Trump Show, there has been little focus on policy by the candidates. They have served up the oft repeated party line soundbites but without reading the fine print. This is how Republicans gained control of Congress in 2012 and 2014 and increased their hold on governerships and state legislatures. Their “campaign of nothing” was not planned, however. They were hoping that they would have a shining example of what their policies could do. Things didn’t go as planned.

In 2010, Sam Brownback was elected governor in Kansas. He promised sweeping legislation that could only be described as the “red state model.” In short, Kansas would become the Tea Party mecca of social and economic conservatism.

Buoyed by winning 63 percent of the vote and a Republican legislature, the governor immediately set out to enact his “experiment” to show the nation that conservatism should be the law of the land. His early legislative victories focused on social issues such as abortion, including the defunding of Planned Parenthood. He also refused to expand Medicaid or set up a state exchange for the Affordable Care Act. Yet it was his legislation signed in May 2012 that would shatter a core tenet of conservative economics.

Conservatives wish to minimize the role of government in people’s lives. More specifically, they wish to eliminate governmental involvement in the “free market” via regulations and taxes. True to his word, Gov. Brownback signed the largest tax cut in Kansas history into law. The plan eliminated income taxes for certain businesses, and lowered personal income tax by 26 percent.

Ultimately the goal was to eliminate all state income taxes, joining the ranks of states like Florida and Texas that have done the same. The promise was that businesses would flock to Kansas, bringing with them jobs and a revitalization of the state’s economy. Just as the midterm elections were underway, Republicans looked forward to having proof that they were right. Things didn’t go as planned.

Within two years, the state faced a $400 million shortfall having obliterated the more than $700 million surplus that was in place when Brownback took office. The state started raiding the funds of public programs in order to make up the loss, resulting in less money for highways and schools ending their school year early. Taking funds from other programs particularly hurt the poorest of Kansans, resulting in controlling how much they accessed their aid by limiting the amount and types of transactions.

Part of the issue was that the planned tax cuts were expected to only affect 191,000 businesses. Yet, a loophole in the law allowed many individuals, such as lawyers and accountants, to be classified as business, resulting in more than 300,000 individuals and businesses paying no income tax. Even with increases in sales and other transaction based taxes, the state has been unable to reverse the budget shortfall. Today, highway projects remain unfinished, teachers have lost their jobs, and several rural communities have lost schools. Not to mention, no businesses have rushed to call Kansas home.

Nevertheless. Brownback was reelected to a second term, even though his margin was a mere four percentage points. Things have gotten so bad the state legislature is even considering raising taxes. Some want to repeal the business tax cut and remove sales taxes from food purchases. However, it is an election year, and the idea of raising taxes, especially in a red state, would be political suicide.

As the primaries sort out who the Republican nominee will eventually be, there is little doubt that cutting of taxes will be part of the stump speeches. Most certainly they will ignore the failed Kansas experiment. It will be up to the voters to remind them of the real costs of small government.

Photo Credit: Mark Wilson via Getty Images News