Former Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman says the American people are “mad as hell” about a political culture that divides the nation and makes problems worse instead of rallying the nations behind common goals.

Lieberman served four terms in the U.S. Senate, three as a Democrat and one as an independent, although he still caucused with Democrats. He was the vice-presidential nominee for the Democrats in 2000 and ran unsuccessfully for the presidential nomination in 2004. In 2008, he angered many Democrats by endorsing and campaigning for GOP nominee John McCain.

Lieberman is now affiliated with the No Labels movement, which on Monday announced that six presidential candidates had endorsed the group’s four major goals: creating 25 million jobs in 10 years, balancing the budget by 2030, preserving Social Security and Medicare for the next 75 years and making America energy independent by 2024. Republicans Donald Trump, Ben Carson, Chris Christie, Rand Paul and John Kasich endorsed the No Labels agenda, as did Democrat Martin O’ Malley.

However, the No Labels announcement also came on a day when a new Gallup survey showed only 29 percent of Americans identify as Democrats and just 26 percent identify as Republicans.

“These are numbers that politicians better read and listen to because ‘the answer, my friend, is blowin’ in the wind,'” said Lieberman, quoting the song made famous by Bob Dylan and Peter, Paul and Mary.

Lieberman told WND and Radio America the public is disgusted with both parties in Washington, and that is made obvious by the campaign success of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders.

“The American people are fed up with the political status quo because they rightly believe it’s not uniting the country but dividing the country,” he said. “It’s not solving their problems. It’s making them worse. They’re pulling away from the two major parties. Within those parties, more and more are turning toward unconventional candidates.”

Lieberman said No Labels is trying to channel those frustrations toward specific goals.

“We’re mad as hell too, but we’re trying to create pressure to disrupt the current system so that people get back to the days when they would compromise,” he said. “Reagan compromised with O’Neill, Clinton with Gingrich and they got some big things done. We need to do that again.”

Listen to the WND/Radio America interview with Joe Lieberman:

The No Labels goals were taken from exhaustive polling done on a variety of issues, but Lieberman said recent events suggest national security ought to be added to the list.

“I bet if we polled today, one of the top four or five would be to protect us, support our national security and because of the threat of radical Islamist terrorism,” Lieberman said. “We’re going to add a fifth goal, which we’re working on now that would deal with national security and terrorism.”

Known for his support for the Iraq War, which cost him his party’s U.S. Senate nomination in 2006, Lieberman sees two major priorities for the next president. One is a restoration of America’s position on the global stage.

“In a dangerous world, which this is, there is no substitute for American strength and American leadership to protect American security,” said Lieberman, who also wants a much more united front when it comes to confronting threats around the world.

“What I’m looking for personally in the next president is somebody who will try to restore the old traditional notion that partisan politics in America ends at the water’s edge,” he said. “In other words, we can disagree on foreign policy or national security, but when we’re facing a foreign challenge or even allies, we’ve got to pull together as Americans.”

When discussing the No Labels goals on jobs, fiscal discipline, entitlements and energy, Lieberman said Americans support those pursuits by a wide margin. No Labels is not stating any preferences on how those objectives ought to be achieved.

But he said for anything substantial to get done, the next president will have to cooperate with the opposition party.

“We’re asking the presidential candidates and, over the next couple of months, congressional candidates to make a promise, which is about as good as we can do at this point, that they will work together across party lines to get something done on the big goals,” Lieberman said. “There’s got to be bipartisan cooperation, which hasn’t happened much in recent years.”