Buy Photo Iraqi journalist Hisham Botan, 36, of Fern Creek, started Louisville’s first Arabic language newspaper. (Photo: Kirsten Clark/The C-J)Buy Photo Story Highlights Hisham Botan, an Iraqi journalist started the city's only Arabic language newspaper.

After three issues, Botan temporarily halted publication due to lack of funding.

Louisville's population of Arabic speakers is expected to continue growing.

When Hisham Botan arrived in the United States from Kurdistan 18 months ago, the Arabic speaker struggled to find resources that could tell him the basics — "How can I get social security? How can I use the bus?" he recalled.

So when Botan, a 36-year-old journalist now living in Fern Creek, couldn't find what he needed, he started his own Arabic language newspaper — the first of its kind in Louisville — called "Al Hayat USA," a name that translates roughly to "Life in the U.S.A."

Botan pulled from his personal finances and a loan through online lending site Kiva Zip for the paper, which was free to readers and had a circulation of about 3,000.

The monthly newspaper was put on hold last month, after those funds ran dry, but Botan hasn't given up.

"I have a big hope I will find a funder and will get my dream," said Botan, who is originally from Mosul, Iraq.

Kentucky Refugee Ministries Executive Director John Koehlinger said Botan's venture comes as Louisville agencies continue to resettle a large number of refugees from Iraq — a trend that started around 2008 — and prepare to aid the first refugees from Syria some time next year.

"Refugees have been coming from Iraq in large numbers for five years," he said. "I think that the time is right for a newspaper for that community."

Botan started several non-profit newspaper publications in Iraq and Kurdistan, funded largely by American and European organizations eager to support democratic efforts in the Middle East in the early 2000s.

Trying to start a paper in a place where most newspapers are for-profits ventures has been a challenge, Botan said.

He has been considering several new business models for the paper and estimates it will cost about $13,000 per issue to resume publication of Al Hayat U.S.A. — which includes salaries for writers, who had in the past operated in a volunteer capacity, as well as printing and distribution.

Botan's October publication — the third issue of Al Hayat U.S.A., the last published before the hiatus — included articles in both Arabic and English. There is a story about a new citizen who fled to Louisville from Egypt and service journalism pieces about how to buy a house and what the fall is like in the states.

The English articles, Botan said, will help "make a bridge between the Arabic speakers' community and English speakers' community to get one strong community."

Koehlinger said the newspaper could also be beneficial within Louisville's Arabic speaking community, providing advertising opportunities for a growing number of small businesses owned and operated by Iraqi Americans.

He also said a newspaper could help to unify the city's Arabic speakers, which he said are sometimes wary of one another because of "trauma and sectarian violence" they may have fled.

"I think a newspaper would be a good unifying presence for that," he said.

Al Hayat U.S.A.

For more information about Al Hayat U.S.A., Louisville's only Arabic language newspaper, go to alhayatusa.com or email Hisham Botan at hishambotan@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1B5ql09