Several Northeast Ohio hospitals were among the 758 nationwide to face penalties under the Hospital-Acquired Condition (HAC) Reduction Program.



The Affordable Care Act established the program, which began doling out penalties in October 2014. Through the HAC Reduction Program, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services reduce Medicare payments by 1% for hospitals that rank in the worst-performing quartile of those receiving HAC scores, a composite assessment of several kinds of infections and complications.



For fiscal year 2016, this included the following: University Hospitals Ahuja Medical Center, MetroHealth System, St. Vincent Charity Medical Center, Akron General Medical Center, Summa Health Systems Hospitals, Lutheran Hospital and Cleveland Clinic.



A statement from the Cleveland Clinic, which was penalized both years, emphasized the system’s commitment to “continuous improvement in quality and safety.”



Akron General, which came under full Clinic ownership this year, and the Clinic’s Lutheran Hospital both avoided payment reductions the first year but will be penalized this time around.



“We identify and implement the best practices for optimal outcomes, and work toward accurate documentation so measures used by CMS capture correct patient data,” the statement read. “We fully support CMS reporting and transparency of quality and safety performance, designed to enhance patient care.”



The HAC Reduction Program is one of three through which CMS can reduce payments to hospitals. In combination with Hospital Value-Based Purchasing and the Readmissions Reduction Program, hospitals face a total possible 6% Medicare payment reduction.





By the numbers

“It’s a big, big amount of money that’s at risk,” said Dr. William Annable, chief quality officer for UH. The UH Ahuja Medical Center was the only facility in its system to receive a HAC penalty both years.Medicare estimates that the fiscal year 2016 HAC score penalties will cost hospitals a total of $364 million.Although the measures in the HAC score have been tracked before, they were rolled into other programs. This is the second year the program has been separate from other measures. In fiscal year 2015, 724 hospitals were subject to a payment reduction applied to all Medicare discharges. About half penalized this year are repeat-offenders.

The program assessed 3,308 hospitals and awarded each a HAC score, which combines measures of central line-associated blood stream infections, catheter-associated urinary tract infections, surgical site infections (which was added this year) and a composite score of eight measures, including postoperative sepsis, accidental punctures/lacerations, pressure ulcers and more.



Nationally, average performances across eligible hospitals improved in two of the three measures included both years. The composite score and central line-associated blood stream infections both showed improvement, but performance decreased slightly for catheter-associated urinary tract infections.



The data included in the total HAC scores released publicly last week is nearly a year old at this point, noted Lori August, senior director of quality for St. Vincent Charity Medical Center, which was penalized both years. The score includes measurements as old as early 2013 and through the end of 2014. Since then, August said the hospital has already made the improvements through its own monitoring of quality and safety indicators.



“It doesn’t really reflect some of the current progress that we make,” she said.





Annable agreed. UH independently tracks measures included in the HAC score and many others “right up to the minute,” he said. The delay can be useful to CMS and for overall monitoring, but not for directing improvements, because by the time the full data set is released, the team has identified and moved past those issues.Hospitals may already know where they stand within their own measures, he said, but the public release of the CMS data shows how they stacked up to other hospitals — an important piece of the program, considering penalties are based on a quartile ranking.“So even though we may be improving year over year, or anybody might be, it’s possible to get penalized if the rest of the country moves faster than you did,” Annable said.The MetroHealth System received a penalty both years and has been “working very hard on improving safety and protecting people from infections and other untoward events,” a statement read. “We have made tremendous progress in many areas and have plans in place to continue improving our infection rates. We take any patient safety issue very seriously and it is our top priority to minimize any type of risk.”Summa Health Systems Hospitals received a FY 2016 penalty after avoiding one previously. Its Barberton hospital was penalized last year but will not have a payment reduction this year. Western Reserve Hospital didn’t receive a penalty either year.Without question, a strong culture of safety is of paramount importance at Summa — as it should be at any hospital,” said Dr. David E. Custodio, Summa’s vice president and hospital chief medical officer, in a statement. “Our leaders in quality are dedicated to taking the necessary steps to ensure that this year’s numbers remain an isolated occurrence.”

Note: Scores greater than 6.75 earned penalties in FY 2016. Scores greater than 7.00 earned penalties in FY 2015.