It's official. I hereby nominate Sarah Palin to be the next president of the United States of America and also Alaska.

And why, you ask, have I suddenly thrown my influential support behind this half-term governor and failed vice presidential candidate?

The answer is simple: Money.

In case you missed the news currently burning up the Interwebs, the Palin family was allegedly involved in a drunken brawl at an Alaska house party last weekend. Several Alaska bloggers picked up on the news, and the Anchorage Police Department confirmed to The Huffington Post and other news outlets that they responded to a fight outside a residence and that some of the Palin family was in attendance.

Here's a description from Alaska blogger Amanda Coyne:

"The owner of the house gets involved, and he probably wished he hadn’t. At this point, he’s up against nearly the whole Palin tribe: Palin women screaming. Palin men thumping their chests. Word is that Bristol has a particularly strong right hook, which she employed repeatedly, and it’s something to hear when Sarah screams, 'Don’t you know who I am!'"

Now that's one grade-A, all-American party. It sounds like Duck Dynasty crossed with a Jersey Shore night out.

Which is why a Palin presidency makes so much sense. If we cast...I mean, elect...Palin president under the condition that her presidency be broadcast around the clock as a subscription-based online reality show, our economic problems are over.

The global revenue from such a production would be astonishing, and every American would get his or her cut, part of the deal for putting a staggeringly unqualified narcissist in the White House. (As opposed to the marginally qualified narcissists we normally elect.)

President Palin could easily live her dream of repealing Obamacare, because the money coming in from England alone -they would love watching Todd Palin mow the White House lawn in a tank top - would allow every American family to hire its own doctor.

Consider this military strategy Palin offered the president a couple days ago on her Facebook page, detailing how to handle the Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria:

"War is hell. So go big or go home, Mr. President. Big means bold, confident, wise assurance from a trustworthy Commander-in-Chief that it shall all be worth it. Charge in, strike hard, get out. Win."

I would pay $1,000 just to watch video of her composing those words. Can you imagine how much Russian President Vladimir Putin might be willing to spend? Cha-ching!

I'm sure we can manage the risks of a Palin presidency by requiring that she have a more competent vice president, perhaps a racoon of average intelligence or a Magic-8 Ball.

I say we do whatever it takes to get her in as commander-in-chief and get those web cams rolling. A Palin First Family reality show is one of America's most bountiful untapped resources.

Let's drill, baby, drill!

rhuppke@tribune.com