Tom Rooney (Photo: news-press.com)

In September, the two House members representing Southwest Florida — Republicans Curt Clawson and Tom Rooney — voted against a temporary spending bill to keep the federal government open past this Thursday.

Their chief reason? The bill, which passed, included funding for President Barack Obama's plan to train and arm Syrian rebels. Clawson and Rooney both called the plan poorly conceived and risky.

But when the House approved a $1.1 trillion spending bill Thursday that would finance most government programs through September of next year — including the Syrian plan — they took opposite sides. Clawson opposed the bill while Rooney supported it.

Buy Photo Curt Clawson (Photo: SARAH COWARD/THE NEWS-PRESS)

The Senate is expected to pass the bill by Monday, and the president has said he will sign it.

Rooney, a member of the Appropriations Committee whose 17th District includes a portion of northwest Lee County, remains unhappy with the president's strategy to combat the jihadist Islamic State, also known as ISIS. But he viewed the chance to pass a long-term bill with important spending reforms as too tempting to pass up.

"Our bill brings federal spending to the lowest level in nearly a decade," said Rooney, R-Okeechobee, highlighting cuts to the Internal Revenue Service and the Environmental Protection Agency. "Instead of punting with another (short-term funding measure) and doing the same things we've been doing for years. ... we're holding federal agencies accountable by cutting spending on programs that don't work, investing in programs that are effective, and ensuring your taxpayer dollars are spent wisely."

In addition, the bill would fund programs key to the state by providing millions to combat citrus diseases, restore the Everglades, and cut backlogs at veterans' health care facilities.

Other reasons the bill won Rooney's support: It bars the transfer of prisoners from Guantanamo Bay to the U.S., requires more oversight of the Affordable Care Act's implementation, and gives local communities more flexibility to implement federal school lunch rules.

But Clawson, R-Bonita Springs, dismissed the bill as an "insider deal."

He noted that it still funds the Affordable Care Act, which he wants to repeal. It also still provides money for the Syrian rebels and for programs that Clawson says are unnecessary with the national debt above $18 trillion.

"We should stay in Washington and get the job done right," Clawson said. "Five years ago, a previous Congress gave the American people a foiled, wasteful, and bloated health care bill for Christmas. This holiday season, let's do what the American people sent us here to do ... use every tool at our disposal to bring our fiscal house in order, defund unconstitutional executive orders, and stop the growth of Obamacare."

The executive order Clawson referred to was Obama's unilateral decision last month to protect 5 million undocumented immigrants — including an estimated 253,000 in Florida — from deportation. The move infuriated congressional Republicans.

They've vowed to neutralize Obama's action by withholding funding for the Homeland Security program that processes those immigrants.

The spending bill before Congress singles out the Homeland Security Department as the only federal agency not financed through the end of fiscal 2015. Instead, the department will receive financing only through February, giving the Republicans in charge of the House and Senate next year time to try and undo Obama's executive order.

Clawson would have preferred to address the immigration order now.

Earlier this week, he and nearly 40 other Republicans tried unsuccessfully to add language to the spending bill that to prohibit any funding to carry out the president's order.

But Rooney, who also opposes the order, thinks the strategy of waiting a short time is better.

"We'll have control of the House and Senate, and (Obama) won't be able to threaten to take away Social Security payments, withhold military pay, or shut down the national parks if he doesn't get his way," he said. "We'll have this fight on our terms, with clear majorities, and with the support of the American people."

Contact Ledyard King at lking@gannett.com; Twitter: @ledgeking

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1Dp88QF