In his Second Inaugural Address in 2013, President Barack Obama signaled that he wanted his legacy to include a cleaner environment. Now, as his second term heads toward the home stretch, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is pushing through an array of new regulations that would put muscle behind that ambition.

In recent weeks, the EPA has issued new rules that would expand the scope of waters regulated by federal government; it is on track to finalize rules later this summer affecting coal-fired power plants; new rules are in the pipeline to increase fuel-efficiency standards for heavy trucks; it was expected to issue new limits last week on emissions from airplanes; and, the White House issued a new strategy last month for protecting honey bees, butterflies and other insects critical to pollinating crops.

Many of these new rules and initiatives have been in the works for some time, but the EPA under administrator Gina McCarthy is pushing hard to get them in place before the administration's term ends next year. The Obama administration's actions are the most significant moves to expand the federal government's environmental regulation since Congress passed the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act and created the Environmental Protection Agency in the 1970s.

It's no surprise that these ambitious efforts have provoked hostile reactions from industry groups, such as the American Farm Bureau, energy producers and coal-mining states. Still, the president and the EPA are on the right course.

Just as this nation worries about the debt it will leave to its grandchildren, it should be worried about the condition of the planet for future generations. The future looks grim unless the United States does a better job of improving the quality of the air and water and reducing its reliance on coal and oil that contribute to climate change. Unfortunately, that will be very difficult in the face of anti-government sentiment among politicians, business, industry and even the general public.

The new rules expanding the definition of regulated "waters of the United States," issued jointly by the EPA and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, illustrate the problem. Farm organizations characterize the new rules as a massive "land grab" by the federal government that would regulate mud puddles and ditches. Critics vow to fight the rules in the courts and Congress.

The EPA has worked hard to emphasize that farming not only retains exemptions from regulations but gained some new ones. The agency's goal is to protect water quality, and water may become polluted long before it reaches main river channels. The changes would affect a very small amount of land area — about 3 percent of wetlands and stream miles, or about 1,500 acres nationwide.

The increase in regulated waters would still be less than what the government regulated before the U.S. Supreme Court issued two rulings in 2001 and 2006 striking down earlier definitions of the EPA's jurisdiction. Rather than a land grab, the EPA and Army Corps set out to clarify regulations that were widely agreed to have been thrown into confusion by those decisions.

Given the hostile reaction triggered by these modest changes, it is obvious that any new environmental regulation will be a tough sell. Even a president who is serious about a greener Earth can go only so far with executive action without broader legislative authority from Congress. Given the current political climate, it is hard to imagine the Clean Water and Clean Air acts passing today.

Ultimately, it will require a groundswell of public support, as when the modern environmental movement was born in the 1970s. That groundswell should happen soon before more rivers are rendered unsuitable for fishing, boating and swimming, more carbon is released into the atmosphere and coastal cities are under water.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1ItIxIB