Photo

COLUMBIA, Miss. — Elizabeth Bordelon planned to go Christmas shopping until nasty weather blowing through southeastern Mississippi convinced her to hold off.

By the time she returned Tuesday to the trailer park here that she had called home for only a short time, a neighbor’s mobile home had flipped onto her grandmother’s, trapping her and Ms. Bordelon’s aunt. She said her grandmother, 73-year-old Maryjean Sartin, was killed, one of four deaths in Columbia and Laurel from likely tornadoes that tore through the area.

“I had left the house to go pick up a friend to go to Hattiesburg and do some Christmas shopping,” Ms. Bordelon said. “But the weather turned so bad that we decided to wait. By the time I got home, I’d rounded the corner and then saw all the damage.”

Ms. Bordelon said her aunt was injured and is hospitalized.

Although she identified her grandmother, the authorities had not released the names of the victims as of Wednesday.

Chasity Magee, 32, owned the trailer that flipped onto Ms. Sartin’s home. She said she and her two children were at her mother’s home about a mile away while the storm raged.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I saw pictures of the trailer park, but it didn’t register to me that that was my trailer,” Ms. Magee said.

She said when she returned Wednesday, she learned of her neighbor’s death. Ms. Magee climbed through a window of her wrecked mobile home to retrieve some personal items, but that was about all she could save.

“I couldn’t salvage Christmas for them,” she said of her 7-year-old and 5-month-old children, “but we’ll be fine. We’ll all be O.K.”

The destructive system damaged communities from Mississippi to Georgia. Flood warnings were issued for several counties in Alabama, Georgia, Florida and Louisiana.

In Columbia, police officers were stationed at all major intersections after traffic lights were either swept away or destroyed. At least 20 people were injured there, according to Mississippi Emergency Management Agency officials.

Utility crews worked Wednesday to restore electricity to the area.

About 6,000 people were without power after the storm, Gov. Phil Bryant said at a news conference in Columbia, about 80 miles southeast of the state capital of Jackson.

Mr. Bryant toured the stricken area by helicopter and by vehicle. He said state emergency officials believed the destruction was caused by a tornado, although the National Weather Service has yet to confirm that.

State emergency workers were evaluating the damage in Columbia, which is in Marion County, and in Jones County to the northeast. Three of the four people killed were in mobile homes and the fourth at a business.