Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. (Photo: J. Scott Applewhite, AP)

What must Mitch McConnell be thinking?

We’re on the eve of Super Tuesday and Donald Trump – DONALD TRUMP – appears to be poised to be running away with the Republican nomination.

Trump has 82 delegates to Ted Cruz’s 17 delegates to Marco Rubio’s 16 delegates. The others are even further behind.

With Super Tuesday coming up with 595 delegates at stake and Trump doing well in the polls, and then a few more contests including Kentucky’s caucus, and then a chunk of winner-take-all primaries a couple of weeks later ...

Folks, this may be over soon.

Now, McConnell, the Senate Majority Leader with among the best poker faces east of the Pecos River, isn’t saying anything about the presidential primary other than somebody, anybody, in his opinion, would be better than Barack Obama.

That’s the signal he’s sending, at least, when he refuses to even consider whoever Obama nominates to the U.S. Supreme Court to replace the late Antonin Scalia. His argument: A president shouldn’t be able to have confirmed a Supreme Court nominee in the last year of a term.

McConnell has been mum on an endorsement.

But as Lady Bird Johnson once said, “Twitter is the window to man’s soul,” (or it was something like that) we might be getting an idea what he thinks by the tweets of his former aids.

On Thursday, McConnell’s former chief of staff and re-election guru Josh Holmes retweeted a Fox News poll that showed Rubio, Cruz and John Kasich all beating Hillary Clinton nationally while Trump trails the former secretary of state by five percentage points.

He also retweeted a story in the Washington Free Beacon with this headline on Friday: “Chris Christie Endorses Trump After Calling Him ‘Guy Who’s Playing Make-Believe on Television.’”

Scott Douglas, another former McConnell aide, tweeted this about New Jersey Chris Christie’s surprise endorsement of Trump: “Trump endorsement shows that @ChrisChristie political career has been one long con. No regard for our Country or Party. #ConArtist"

And he posted this: “One #ConMan supports another. @ChrisChristie is a disgrace to the Republican Party.”

Scott Jennings, who runs the McConnell super PAC “Kentuckians for Strong Leadership,” spent the Republican debate Thursday retweeting jabs at Trump for citing as proof of support for the Israeli government the fact that he was grand marshal of New York City’s Israel Day parade a few years ago.

And McConnell’s biographer John David Dyche said in two tweets, “Christie's endorsement of Trump reminds me of Plato's comment on the friends of despots at Gorgias 510 B where Socrates observes that: Despots cannot befriend betters, whom they fear, or inferiors, whom they despise, but only men of like character, who truckle to them.”

1/2: Christie's endorsement of Trump reminds me of Plato's comment on the friends of despots at Gorgias 510 B where Socrates observes that: — John David Dyche (@jddyche) February 27, 2016

2/2: Despots cannot befriend betters, whom they fear, or inferiors, whom they despise, but only men of like character, who truckle to them. — John David Dyche (@jddyche) February 27, 2016

This doesn’t necessarily express McConnell’s thoughts on the issue of Trump, but it, at the very least, reflects the thoughts of those who are of like minds with him – and McConnell isn’t known for surrounding himself with people who stray far away.

We're to a point where you might suspect that even a Cruz nomination would be preferable to McConnell. I can't believe I just typed that.

McConnell can’t say any of this himself, however. What’s behind Trump’s rise is the disgust people in his party have for what is going on in Washington. McConnell is the embodiment of Washington and interjecting himself into such a race would inflame passions even more.

A Republican last week told me that this is all Barack Obama’s fault; that he’s the one who created this movement within the GOP that despises establishment politicians because of the way he has governed.

Obama hasn’t helped matters with policy decisions and with his attitude that has become snarkier toward Republicans as he has run into roadblock after roadblock, but McConnell is hardly blameless.

Seven years of enduring obstruction has made our country’s government more than dysfunctional.

Seven years of enduring attacks on a Democratic president – even when he puts forward a Republican idea like the individual health care mandate – stokes an anger that in the end becomes difficult, even impossible, to control.

If Trump winds up as the Republican nominee, the establishment GOP has no one to blame but itself.

Joseph Gerth can be reached at 502-582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/2120geE