Prepare to pay an average of 9.5 percent more for your Obamacare health insurance plan next year if you don't qualify for federal subsidies. But consumers who qualify for subsidies and choose the most popular plans should see significant savings.

Florida's Office of Insurance Regulation on Wednesday announced that premiums for individual major medical plans sold on and off the federal exchange would increase an average of 9.5 percent beginning Jan. 1.

Yet, premiums will decrease significantly for individuals and families in most counties who qualify for federal subsidies and buy the most popular mid-priced "Silver" plans. That's largely because federal subsidies will increase to offset the premium hikes.

The 9.5 percent average increase is less than the 13.2 percent average increase reported a year ago for the 2015 plans, but critics say it confirms what they've been long saying about the Affordable Care Act.

"Today's announcement of further insurance rate hikes is just the latest evidence that there is nothing affordable about the so-called "Affordable Care Act,'" Chris Hudson, Florida state director of Americans for Prosperity, said in an email statement. "Putting Washington bureaucrats in charge of health care decisions is never going to increase choice, competition or innovation."

Jay Wolfson, associate vice president of USF Health, which oversees the ACA sign-up campaign in South Florida, said the rate increases reflect the increased consumption of services by consumers who have been using health insurance for the first time under Obamacare, and costs of expanded coverage such as allowing parents to keep their children on their plans up to age 26, the end of restrictions on covering pre-existing conditions, the end of the lifetime benefits cap and the phasing out of the Medicare Part D "donut hole."

He sees the annual increases leveling off after five to 10 years. "But in the short term, it's going to cost more money," he said.

The 9.5 percent average increase for 2016 was determined after the Office of Insurance Regulation approved rate filings submitted in May by 19 health insurance companies, a news release said. Companies' average rate changes for plans sold on the federal exchange ranged from a decrease of 9.7 percent to an increase of 16.4 percent.

This year, the Office of Insurance Regulation regained the authority to approve or deny requested rate changes after being barred by state law from regulating rates in 2014 and 2015, the first two years plans were offered under the Affordable Care Act.

The plan with the largest average increase of the 11 federal exchange plans is UnitedHealthcare of Florida Inc. at 16.4 percent. A subsidiary of the nation's largest health insurance company, UnitedHealthcare of Florida offered plans in 65 of Florida's 67 counties during the 2015 enrollment period. That plan's average monthly premium will increase from $398 to $463 in 2016.

Average approved rate increases were less than requested for five of the 11 exchange plans. But for five others, approved increases were larger than requested.

Humana Medical Plan Inc., for example, requested a rate increase averaging 7.4 percent. Yet state regulators approved an average increase of 16.3 percent, which will bring its average monthly premium from $343 to $399. The additional increase reflected new information received from the federal government's Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services regarding risk adjustment and reinsurance, Humana spokesman Mitch Lubitz said.

Sometimes state regulators will require bigger-than-requested rate increases to ensure a plan can remain solvent, said Cheryl Fish-Parcham, private insurance program director for Families USA, a nonprofit consumer advocacy organization that supports the ACA. "When rates are too low, that might be a problem because a company might not have the resources to pay claims," she said.

Aetna Health requested an average 20.9 percent increase, and the state approved an increase of 13.9 percent. It's average monthly premium will jump from $334 to $381.

Although Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Florida's 8.9 percent average increase will make its average monthly premium highest in the state at $472 a month, the company's internal numbers show that customers in the company's eight-county South Florida region will pay a comparatively lower average increase of 3 percent, said company spokesman Douglas Bartel.

The health plan with the 9.7 percent decrease — Florida Health Care Plans Inc. — was the most expensive of the 11 federal exchange plans in 2015. Florida Health Care Plans Inc. is available in only four Central Florida counties.

Click here to download a fact sheet showing the average premium changes requested and approved for each of the 19 companies.

The price changes apply to people who purchase individual plans and earn too much money to apply for federal tax credit subsidies. About 90 percent of the total 1.6 million Affordable Health Care enrollees in Florida do not pay full price, and in South Florida, 622,000 consumers have subsidized policies.

Comparison tables also released by the state show out-of-pocket costs for families and individuals who buy mid-priced plans and qualify for subsidies will go down, significantly in some cases, in 64 of Florida's 67 counties.

Average monthly premiums for an individual earning $27,000 a year who purchases a mid-priced "Silver" plan will decline in Broward County from $272 to $208 a month and in Palm Beach County from $270 to $217 a month.

A family of four earning $53,000 a year will see their monthly premium decline in Broward County from $680 to $458 a month as their federal subsidy increases from $404 to $494. In Palm Beach County, the same family of four will see their premium decrease $671 to $489 as their federal subsidy increases from $353 to $445.

Rates approved by the state have not yet been reviewed by the federal Department of Health & Human Services and are subject to change, the state Office of Insurance Regulation news release said.

rhurtibise@sun-sentinel.com, 954-856-5364