Timothy Jost

April 10, 2015

April 13 update: Tax relief based on incorrect or delayed form 1095-As. On April 10, 2015, the IRS released Notice 2015-30 regarding penalty relief related to incorrect or delayed forms 1095-A. Form 1095-A is the form that the federal and state marketplaces use to inform taxpayers regarding the premium tax credits that they have received for the previous year. The notice provides relief for taxpayers who received a 1095-A that was delayed or that the taxpayer believed to be incorrect if the taxpayer nonetheless files his or her 2014 income tax return by April 15 or requests an extension and files the return by October 15. The relief is for 2014 only.

The relief applies to penalties imposed under four provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. Section 6651(a)(2) imposes a penalty for failure to pay an amount shown on a tax return by the date due, generally April 15. Section 6651(a)(3) imposes a penalty for failure to pay the amount of tax that should have been reported on a return but was not paid within 21 days of notice and demand. Section 6654(a) imposes a penalty if a taxpayer underpays estimated taxes unless the taxpayer falls under one of the safe harbors provided under that provision. Finally, section 6662(a) & (b) impose a penalty for underpayment attributable to a substantial understatement of income tax. All of these penalties can be waived for reasonable cause.

The notice recognizes that over 800,000 taxpayers received incorrect 1095-As and that the provision of some 1095-As was delayed. It further recognizes that because of these errors and delays, some taxpayers may be unable to file a return accurately reflecting their tax liability by the April 15 deadline for filing taxes or requesting an extension.

The Service will abate the 6651(a)(2) and section 6651(a)(3) penalties and waive the 6654(a) penalty for taxpayers who received a delayed 1095-A or a 1095-A that the taxpayer believed to be incorrect if the taxpayer files a return by April 15 or requests an extension by April 15 and files a return by October 15. The Service will also not impose an accuracy-related penalty under 6662 for underpayments relating to the receipt of an incorrect or delayed 1095-A. Taxpayers who were not enrolled in a qualified health plan but erroneously received a 1095-A and used it to file their taxes must amend their return by April 15, 2016 to qualify for relief.

Taxpayers who are unable to file by April 15 must request an automatic extension of time to file. The Service will collect interest due on any taxes owed that are filed late.

To claim relief from the 6651(a)(2) and 6651(a)(3) penalties, taxpayers must submit a letter claiming relief under the Notice 2015-30 when they receive a demand for payment from the IRS. A taxpayer who receives a letter asserting a 6662 penalty may claim relief with a similar letter. A taxpayer may request a waiver of the 6654(a) penalty by filing an underpayment of estimated tax form (2210) and including on it the statement “received an incorrect or delayed 1095-A.”

Original post: In the five years since it was enacted, the Affordable Care Act has been subject to dozens of legal challenges. Far fewer cases have been brought seeking to implement or enforce the terms of the ACA. On April 10, 2015, however, the federal Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit entered what is to my knowledge the first federal appellate court opinion in a case enforcing the law, St. Louis Effort for AIDS v. Huff. The court held unanimously that challenged provisions of the Missouri Health Insurance Marketplace Innovation Act (HIMIA) limiting the activities of certified application counselors (CACs) were preempted by federal regulations promulgated under the ACA and were thus unenforceable under the Constitution’s Supremacy Clause.

The ACA created “navigators” — individuals and entities charged with providing consumers with health insurance information and assisting them in enrolling in coverage through the exchanges. Federal regulations implementing the ACA recognize additionally certified application counselors (CACs) and non-navigator assistance personnel, who have the same responsibilities but do not receive federal grants.

A number of states have enacted laws and administrative regulations to oversee the activities of navigators, CACs, and non-navigator assisters. These laws have been driven in part by a legitimate concern that consumers receive assistance from properly trained, competent, and honest advisors. In at least some states, however, these laws have also been driven by lobbying by insurance agents and brokers anxious about protecting their turf and by political opposition to the ACA. In some states, state regulatory initiatives have threatened to seriously compromise the ability of consumer assistance personnel to do their job. The plaintiffs in St. Louis Effort for AIDs argued that HIMIA was such a law.

The St. Louis case was brought by a group of CACs to enjoin several specific provisions of the HIMIA. Early in 2014, the district court entered a preliminary injunction enjoining the enforcement of the HIMIA in its entirety against navigators and CACs. Missouri appealed to the Eighth Circuit.

The Eighth Circuit unanimously affirmed the district court’s decision insofar as it enjoined three provisions of the law challenged by the plaintiff CACs. It reversed the district court’s decision insofar as it pertained to navigators, as none of the plaintiffs were navigators and thus none had standing to challenge the application of the law to navigators. The court also narrowed the breadth of district court’s decision as described below.

Although a court must find that a number of requirements are met for a preliminary injunction to issue, the Eighth Circuit decision focused entirely on the likelihood of the plaintiffs succeeding on the law, deferring to the district court’s decision on the other elements. The basic argument of the plaintiffs in challenging the HIMIA provisions was that the provisions were preempted by federal law and were thus unconstitutional under the Supremacy Clause. The ACA contains an express preemption clause: “Nothing in this title shall be construed to preempt any State law that does not prevent the application of the provisions of this title.”

The district court had concluded that several provisions of the HIMIA did prevent the application of the ACA, and it thus enjoined the enforcement of the entire law. The Eighth Circuit noted that the plaintiffs only challenged three provisions of the law, however, and that Missouri law contains a severance clause providing that if any provision of a law is found unconstitutional, other provisions of the law survive, and the law as a whole does not fall. On this basis it reversed the district court’s order with respect to provisions of the law not challenged by the plaintiffs.

The court recognized that in mid-2014, the Department of Health and Human Services had issued regulations clarifying the duties of CACs and addressing the effect of the ACA’s preemption clause as it applied to state regulation of CACs. The court rejected Missouri’s argument that HHS had exceeded its authority in enacting these rules, as the ACA delegates to HHS broad authority to establish regulations governing assistance personnel.

The court concluded that insofar as these rules imposed substantive requirements, they had the status of federal law and thus preempted state laws that prevented their application. The court declined to give the same deference to the preemption provision of the regulations. The court recognized that HHS’s interpretation of the preemptive authority of its CAC’s rules might be accorded some weight, but it determined that it could decide the reach of federal preemption based on its own interpretation of the law without relying on the rule. It then turned to the three challenged HIMIA requirements to consider whether they preempted the HIMIA.

The first of these provisions prohibited CACS from providing “advice concerning the benefits, terms, and features of a particular health plan,” or offering “advice about which exchange health plan is better or worse for a particular individual or employer.” The court held that this provision conflicted directly with the obligation of CACs under federal law to provide information to individuals and employers about available health plans and to “clarify the distinctions among health coverage options.” The court rejected the attempt by Missouri to read the provision as only prohibiting CACs from recommending particular coverage options and enjoined the application of the provision.

The second provision forbid CACs from giving “any information or services related to health benefit plans or other products not offered in the exchange.” The court concluded that this provision was inconsistent with the obligation of CACs to provide consumers with information as to the full-range of options available to them, including off-exchange plans.

The third challenged provision required CACs who came in contact with individuals with existing coverage obtained through a broker or agent to advise those individuals to consult with a licensed agent or broker concerning coverage in the private market. The court recognized that under Missouri law, agents represent the insurer and owe no duty to the insured. Although brokers do owe a fiduciary duty to consumers, they are not required to provide complete and impartial information. The federal regulations require CACs to provide “fair, impartial, and accurate information” and preempt state laws requiring CACs to refer consumers to individuals who are not under a similar obligation. The court, therefore, enjoined this provision of the HIMIA as well.

The Eight Circuit rejected a due process claim argued by the plaintiffs which challenged as void for vagueness a remedial provision of the HIMIA that authorized the department of insurance to discipline CACs for, among other things, “other good cause,” concluding that the statute in fact only allowed the department to discipline a CAC for misconduct. The court did not reach the freedom of speech challenges raised by the plaintiffs since it ruled for them on other grounds.

The controversy surrounding the navigator and CAC programs which was so hot in 2013 and 2014 has largely cooled. In fact I am unaware of any major problems caused by navigators or CACs for consumers — or for agents, brokers, and state regulators — in the first two years of the programs. At the recent spring meeting of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, I did not see any navigator issues on the agenda, a dramatic change from earlier meetings.

For what it is worth, two of the judges on the Eighth Circuit panel were G.W. Bush appointees and the third a Reagan appointee. As I note from time to time, law is not driven entirely by politics.

In other ACA implementation news, the IRS released on April 9, 2015 an extended series of questions and answers regarding incorrect forms 1095-A and Premium Tax Credits. These Q&As largely explore in greater detail issues discussed in earlier guidance. They do clarify a couple of issues that I do not recall being addressed by earlier guidance.

First, they clarify that an individual who 1) has been notified that he or she has received an incorrect form 1095-A but has not yet received a corrected form, or 2) has identified an error in a 1095-A that that has not yet been resolved by the marketplace, may either file a tax return based on the incorrect 1095-A (and will not have to file an amended return once the 1095-A issue is resolved) or may file for an extension of time and file the return when a correct 1095-A is received. Second, the Q&As clarify that if an individual asks for an extension of time because the individual did not receive a 1095-A or corrected 1095-A in time to file, the individual should pay taxes owed at the time of requesting an extension. Third, the Q&As clarify that individuals who should have received a 1095-A because they received premium tax credits but filed before the 1095-A was received, or who did not receive premium tax credits but filed a return based on an 1095-A received in error, should file an amended return.