(Left to right): Connor Schatz, Sam Fielden, Ellie Greenberg, Ethan York, Donovan Mitchell, Dorrianne Wilson, Ian Helmon, Theresa Krauskoph, Patrick Helmon, William Sellhorst, Sam Zitelli, Curtis Lispsey, Deanna Frank, Adam Reeve, Matthew Miles, Zoe Krauskoph, Kate Huttunen, Ed Huttunen (Photo: Photo courtesy of Shelly Helmon)

Sometimes the word sports feels synonymous with competition. But does it have to be that way?

After all, there are so many demands on kids these days — chief among them the pressure to do well at school. So the logical question is: Is the added stress on young kids really worth it? Aren't sports supposed to be fun?

Leading the charge locally, Highland Youth Recreation is a recreational sports league that offers spring and fall soccer, summer baseball, T-Ball, and softball to our community since 1976.

RELATED | For coaches, communication is key

HYR is an outreach of Highlands Community Ministries, and offers teams for boys and girls ages 4-17.

And one very interesting HYR offering is its Division 6 soccer, a co-ed division for 13-17 year olds — an age group that is often overlooked in the "non-competitive sports" category.

"I started as just a parent at HYR in 2003 when my oldest son decided to try soccer after being discouraged with some of the area's competitive programs," said soccer coach Patrick Helmon. "Since he had never played soccer, we decided to try HYR so that he could learn about the sport. It was such a positive experience we continued to attend HYR and the following year I stepped up as coach."

RELATED | Youth Sports | Are sports safe for kids with high blood pressure?

Helmon noticed the lack of participation in the league's division 6 and the inequality of the teams. He suggested that division 6 become one large team that would practice together, and then on game day, they would be split into two teams, equal in talent.

Their first season they had about 16 kids total. Helmon asked some of the teenage referees to come and fill out the teams when necessary. He noticed one of the regular players smiling — they were enjoying having some of the more experienced and often more talented referees helping them learn the game through play rather than just instruction during practice.

The number of kids participating in the program slowly increased. After four seasons, there were 26 kids and many choosing to return. This past season, their numbers were up to 34 kids plus three to four referees, allowing them to split the group into 4 teams.

"It does not matter what skill level or experience a child has — everyone plays," said Helmon. "At this age, the kids who come and play want to be there and want to participate."

In the sometimes-stressful sports atmosphere today, a program like this is a welcome addition.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1BN3Y2g