If you were to pick the public servant least likely to rock the boat on just about any matter, you couldn't go wrong with Bill Dudley. So cautious is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that his periodic off-the-record lunches with the media tend to consist of him repeating comments he made in public speeches weeks earlier. When pressed for his views on interest rates, the economy or most anything else, he tends to observe how very uncertain the future truly is.



So Mr. Dudley's remarks last week were truly striking. About halfway through a droning speech at the New York University School of Law, the New York Fed president came out and said what lots of people have suspected for a while: Wall Street doesn't respect the rule of law.



"Enhancements to our current [regulatory] regime may not solve another important problem evident within some large financial institutions—the apparent lack of respect for law, regulation and the public trust," Mr. Dudley said.



That's a heck of a thing to hear from a central banker, arguably the most important one in the world apart from Ben Bernanke and the nominee to replace him, Janet Yellen.



"There is evidence of deep-seated cultural and ethical failures at many large financial institutions," Mr. Dudley added. "Whether this is due to size and complexity, bad incentives or some other issues is difficult to judge, but it is another critical problem that needs to be addressed."



He concluded: "Tough enforcement and high penalties will certainly help focus managements' attention on this issue."

Occupy Wall Street couldn't have said it better.



It's tempting to dismiss Mr. Dudley's remarks as merely the Fed's showing it has adopted a tougher posture toward Wall Street, as have the Justice Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission and other regulators.



But words like these matter. They matter because they provide cover to all the Fed examiners and other officials assigned much greater authority to oversee JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs and others by the Dodd-Frank law. Mr. Dudley has basically put banks on notice: Those flouting the spirit and letter of the law need to be reined in.



Mr. Dudley's remarks are also striking because the Fed's history as a regulator is pretty bleak. Alan Greenspan figured the market would solve problems on its own, and Mr. Bernanke's focus has been preventing another Great Depression. The Fed will soon have a new chief in Ms. Yellen. One would think she was aware ahead of time of the verbal bomb Mr. Dudley just dropped.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments