Published July 6, 2014 at 9:05 a.m. Tweet

The "Social Circle" is a group effort between readers, social networkers and the OnMilwaukee.com editors. Every Monday, we ask a question via Facebook and Twitter and then post the responses from our Facebook "likers" and Twitter followers in this column. Well-known Milwaukee movers and shakers will contribute, too.

Where's a good place to meet someone when you're in your 20s and 30s? The Social Circle is full of advice this week. The short answer? Anywhere. The long answer? Keep reading.

Sarah Ammann: "Can't believe I'm going to admit it but I met my man at Cans! We are getting married next month."

Nick Berg: "Boswell Books. You can't help but meet wonderful people there. Just be brave enough to be the first one to say 'hello.'"

Benjamin Burdick: "Outside. Anywhere. Dog parks, walking to work, Brewers game, cat toy store, the morning after at some state park under the willow tree."'

Megan Clare: "Friends of friends. Get a wide social circle with a number of acquaintances and lots of activity."

Melissa Drummond: "Lakefront during the summer."

Steve Etheridge: "It depends on what you are looking for. If you want someone to be a potential relationship, the worst place to go looking is a bar. Unless you are a drunk, then …"

Andrea Guizar: "All of the successes I know, including personally, come through meeting people through friends of yours, at parties, or through work functions or something like that."

Kyle Hanson: "At work. But only if you are the boss."

Jolinda Klopp: "Grocery store."

Paul Kloster: "Coffee shop or library."

Bradley James Kroll: "I met my girlfriend when she was waitressing at the now defunct Rooters in Waukesha. Everyone would hit on her except me, because I wanted to know more about her. Four years later, it's the best choice I ever made."

Jamie Kruschke: "I generally meet guys at concerts – that way I know they have the same music taste as me, which is important."

Meghan Lowrey-Brace: "I met my husband at Leff's Lucky Town."

Bridget McMahon: "I met my husband at a 'Dating for Nerds' event in Milwaukee three years ago."

Leah Michelle Mailloux: "I've met guys at the library, in class, Summerfest."

Jim Mallmann: "Community theater. Get involved."

Brian Mann: "A better question is where to go to meet people who aren't on your deal breaker list like being too old or too overweight or too religious."

Katie Mrotek: "I met a guy at Jo-Cat's Pub once. Now he's my husband."

Terry Pelot: "Sign up for college. Domes. Parks. Antique shops."

Amy Singstock: "Ale House has worked like a charm for me."

Ryan Skoczynski: "I got pulled over by my girlfriend in her squad car."

Elizabeth Suesskind: "Mad Planet Friday night '80s dance party."

Andrea Vodicka: "I met my husband while playing kickball."

Nancy Hare Wall: "Church. But I met my husband in a bar."

Melissa Moore Wilson: "I met my husband at work. Otherwise bars or match.com are where most couples I know met."

Caitlín Zhenotdel: "At your kid's school."