Michael McKenry’s two-run, walk-off homer in the 11th inning Wednesday at Coors Field was a life preserver.

Sure, it’s just one game in a Rockies season that, for postseason aspirations, was essentially over after an 11-game losing streak in May.

But consider the alternative.

If the Rockies had not fought back to defeat the Mariners, 7-5, they would have been swept at home, would have lost for the eighth time in 10 games and would be in danger of challenging Philadelphia for the worst record in the major leagues.

They would have been packing all that misery as they head into an East Coast swing against the Nationals and Mets, teams stacked with great pitching that are fighting each other for the National League East title. The Rockies begin a weekend series at Washington on Friday, then play four at New York beginning Monday.

“This win does something to get our confidence back, and that’s huge because we have to go against the Mets and Nationals,” said Carlos Gonzalez, whose three-run, line-drive, 468-foot homer in the sixth got the Rockies back into the game. “We still have something to play for.”

The Rockies (45-61) are on pace for a 93-loss season. This is a team taking on water at a rapid pace because of leaky starting pitching and a hide-your-eyes bullpen.

The possibility of the first 100-loss season in franchise history remains.

“I just want to see us keep fighting,” said manager Walt Weiss said. “We have played some really tough games, over the last week and a half especially. We answered the bell today, and there have been many examples of that lately.”

The road ahead is brutal. The Rockies were swept in the three games at Nationals Park last season, and also swept in three games by the Mets at Citi Field. Colorado, which began the season 6-0 on the road, has gone 14-32 since . The Rockies’ road on-base percentage is .291, worst in the National League.

They will be fielding a team with a lot of new parts as they head east. Star shortstop Troy Tulowitzki is gone to Toronto, Jose Reyes has taken his place and Kyle Parker is getting time at first base and the outfield. The Rockies are using a closer by committee, by default.

Third baseman Nolan Arenado says that what the Rockies do now is important for setting a tone for next season and beyond.

“The rest of this season is a big deal, and this road trip is a big road trip,” he said. “Why not go out there and spoil it for those two teams?”

McKenry, who hit the first walk-off homer of his career, furnished one of the best quotes of the year.

He was talking about his own home run, but he could have been talking about his team.

“Sometimes it’s tough, but just keep running forward,” he said. “Sometimes the escalator is going down and you’re running up.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders @denverpost.com or twitter.com/ psaundersdp