Federation Employment and Guidance Services seemingly hit bottom when it filed for bankruptcy last month, awash in red ink. But now FEGS workers are jumping ship, pushing the once-mighty social-services agency deeper into the abyss.

FEGS is facing "serious challenges" in maintaining adequate staffing to serve its clients, Chief Executive Kristin Woodlock disclosed in an April 3 affidavit. In service areas for the developmentally disabled alone, there have been 38 staff resignations since February, with staff vacancies topping 100 and turnover rates "doubling to 33% and rising." That's especially true for programs where FEGS' replacement has yet to be named.

Instead of showing up for work, employees are using sick time. To compensate for the exodus, FEGS has paid for more than 13,000 hours of overtime at a cost exceeding $230,000 and relied heavily on temporary workers. It has hired 100 of them—but credentialing more is not easy. As a result, FEGS has 79 unfilled requests pending with temp agencies. Managers also have been working a huge amount of overtime without extra pay.

"This is simply not a sustainable situation," Ms. Woodlock wrote. But no one wants to work at a bankrupt agency in liquidation. She described the dire situation in a request to the bankruptcy court to expedite the transfer of its programs for the developmentally disabled to another agency.

GUILTY VERDICT

Jurors convicted 21-year-old Dzhokhar Tsarnaev of carrying out the bombings at the 2013 Boston Marathon, considered the worst terror assault on U.S. soil since the Sept. 11 attacks. He was found guilty on all 30 counts. The jury will reconvene April 21 to determine whether he will face the death penalty.

VIACOM WOES

The media giant will take $785 million in pretax charges for its restructuring plan, which includes cutting 264 New York City employees and writing down the value of underperforming shows. It will also temporarily suspend a $20 billion share-­repurchase plan. Viacom says the move will help it save $175 million in 2015 and $350 million a year going forward.

'BRIDGEGATE' INDICTMENT

Federal prosecutors could announce indictments as soon as this week regarding the 2013 lane closures at the George Washington Bridge. The scandal has plagued New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and his political ambitions—including a rumored presidential candidacy.

POL LEAVES LAWYER POST

After 43 years, David Samson, the former chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, is retiring from Wolff & Samson, the law firm he founded. The firm, which has been closely tied to Mr. Christie and the bridge scandal, will change its name to reflect new leadership.

LAYOFF NOTICE

Yeshiva University will cut as many as 2,100 jobs this summer, as the university prepares for Montefiore Health System to take over its Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Many employees will be hired by Montefiore or a new entity created postmerger.

EXTRA OVERTIME

New York state government agencies spent a record $661 million on overtime in 2014, up $50 million from the previous year. The figure includes $180 million at the Department of Corrections and Community Supervision and $138 million at the Office for People With Developmental Disabilities. Total extra hours worked by state-agency employees increased 1 million, to nearly 16 million, last year compared with 2013.

STARTUP HITS MILESTONE

Red-hot ad-tech startup AppNexus, valued at $1 billion, hired 93 employees during the first quarter, a company record. The number does not include the 70 who joined the firm as part of its acquisition of fellow Manhattan ad-tech firm Yieldex. AppNexus—the ninth-fastest-growing company in the New York area, according to Crain's research—now employs 920, including 600 at its Flatiron district headquarters.

EMPTY BEDS

A new study of staffed-bed capacity in city hospital obstetrics units found a significant number of empty beds that collectively cost an estimated $26.4 million annually. The authors conclude that new health care delivery and payment models will further reduce demand for hospital stays.

NEW BAM CHIEF NAMED

Katy Clark, head of the Orchestra of St. Luke's, has been named president of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, effective in late summer. She will succeed longtime chief Karen Brooks Hopkins.

IN MEMORIAM

Jack Friedman, executive director of the Queens Chamber of Commerce, died at 55. Mr. Friedman took over the Queens chamber in 2007, after working as chief of staff to Councilman Mark Weprin. "Jack was fiercely committed to making Queens a key center of economic opportunity and prosperity," Queens Borough President Melinda Katz said.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments