The quiet atmosphere Jordan Davis has found in Greeley, as opposed to the hustle of his hometown of Las Vegas, is appealing, and the freshman guard is becoming more and more at home on the University of Northern Colorado basketball team.

The Bears are off to a 2-6 start, but over the past four games, Davis has shown signs that he’s making a quick transition from high school to college.

Heading into Sunday’s home game against Colorado State, the 6-foot-2 Davis has reeled off four straight games of scoring at least 10 points, including a 22-point, eight-rebound game against University of California at Riverside.

“I’ve developed more focus in practice,” Davis said. “I’m getting more comfortable in knowing what to do, and the action in the games is becoming slower for me.”

But Davis knows he still has work to do. While his 10 steals lead the team and his 10.5 points a game ranks fourth, he leads the team in turnovers with 25.

“The more games I play, I know I have to get the turnovers down,” Davis said. “I’m a positive team player, a good defender, and I try to create shots for the other guys on the team by getting as many assists as I can.”

Davis’ path to UNC crossed some obstacles. When he came out of Canyon Spring High School in Las Vegas, Davis experienced the recruiting rush when his scoring average of 23.1 points per game ranked second among high school players in Nevada. He originally made a commitment to Eastern Washington, but he changed his mind.

“I felt I was rushed and there was a lot of miscommunication in the recruiting process,” Davis said. “My older brother Gerad Davis got involved and there was talk about a package deal.”

Jordan Davis walked away.

“I wanted to take my time and find a coaching staff and a school that allowed me to feel comfortable,” Davis said. “I have no regrets.”

Davis says he plays with a chip on his shoulder, maybe a reflection of where he grew up.

“I lived in a rough area,” he said, “and basketball was my outlet.”

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or @irvmoss