Topics: From the Wires, News

ANCHORAGE, Alaska (AP) — The Latest on the eruption of Alaska’s Pavlof Volcano (all times local):

4 p.m.

Alaska Airlines says it has cancelled more flights because of a massive cloud of volcanic ash from Alaska’s Pavlof Volcano that spewed into the air.

The Seattle-based airliner said Monday afternoon it has canceled 41 flights involving six Alaska cities until the airline can evaluate weather reports after daylight Tuesday. The cancellations include all flights to and from Fairbanks.

The airline says the canceled flights affected 3,300 passengers.

Flights to Barrow, Bethel, Kotzebue, Nome and Deadhorse also are cancelled.

The airline says it will resume its 54 regularly scheduled flights on Tuesday if conditions improve.

Pavlof Volcano, one of Alaska’s most active, is 625 miles southwest of Anchorage on the Alaska Peninsula.

The volcano erupted Sunday afternoon, and by Monday morning an ash cloud had stretched northeast more than 400 miles into interior Alaska.

___

3 p.m.

The National Weather Service has issued a weather bulletin warning Alaska residents who live in the region of the Pavlof Volcano that ash may fall on their communities if the wind direction shifts as expected.

The bullet was in effect through early Monday night for Cold Bay, Sand Point and Nelson Lagoon.

The communities are north and east of Pavlof Volcano, which erupted Sunday and continued sending ash into the air Monday.

The weather service says the communities could see an accumulation of less than one-tenth of an inch of ash.

Volcanic ash is angular and sharp and can injure skin, eyes and breathing passages. The ash also can damage electronic devices and vehicle engines.

___

12 p.m.

Alaska Airlines says it has cancelled 20 flights because of volcanic ash put in the air by Alaska’s Pavlof Volcano.

Spokeswoman Bobbie Egan says the canceled flights affected about 1,300 customers heading to rural Alaska communities including Bethel, Kotzebue, Nome, Barrow and Deadhorse.

No flights to Anchorage or Fairbanks have been canceled so far, but Egan says the company is closely monitoring the Fairbanks route.

Pavlof Volcano, one of Alaska’s most active, is 625 miles southwest of Anchorage on the Alaska Peninsula.