Too poor to push? Why more and more women are delaying motherhood



A recent survey shows money is the number-one reason for delaying motherhood – but are our expectations just too high? Emma Elms reports on the rise of economic infertility





'I'd like the freedom to be financially comfortable, not to have arguments about money in front of the kids'

‘We’re barely surviving as it is’

Danelle Jordan (right), 25, from London, goes to law school every day, works mornings and evenings, and on Saturdays runs her cupcake business on the side.



Next year she’ll finish college and become a trainee solicitor but, despite the multiple income streams, she just can’t imagine how she and her partner Chris, a sales manager, will ever have the children they dream of. And it’s nothing to do with fertility issues – it all boils down to money.

‘Even in five years’ time I don’t think we’ll be able to afford to have children,’ she says. Danelle, who shares a rented one-bed flat with Chris, imagined becoming a mum by the time she was 30, but says it’s no longer an option.



‘If it did happen we wouldn’t be giving our children the kind of life we’d want to,’ she says. ‘I’d like the freedom to be financially comfortable, not to have arguments about money in front of the kids, as my parents often did in front of me – now they’re divorced.’

Seeing her sister pregnant has made the reality of economic infertility hit home. ‘My sister’s only a year and a half older than me and lives in Australia, where we’re from, and is pregnant. But for me, with the cost of living in London, it’s just too difficult. It’s not out of the question for us to leave London, but both our jobs are here. Assuming I worked after having a baby, we’d then need childcare, which would be equivalent to one of our monthly wages. Grandparents couldn’t help with childcare either – my family’s in Australia and Chris’s mum lives in Florida.’

Like many people, Danelle sees buying a home as a non-negotiable prerequisite for having a baby. While many of our European cousins never own their home and rent for life, the UK system does not always offer the security of a long-term let.



‘I wouldn’t want the drama of having a two-month notice period to move out,’ says Danelle, ‘and the wear and tear from a baby on a rented house can end up costing you a fortune and even prevent you getting your deposit back. Finding a house near good schools and parks is a job in itself, so I’d want to know I wouldn’t have to keep moving. But the prospect of saving a 20 per cent deposit to buy a house in London is out of the question. For us to be able to afford a baby now, Chris would need to be earning a lot more and I’d still need a part-time job. At the moment, we’re barely surviving as it is.’

Danelle and her partner Chris

'Even in five years' time I don’t think we’ll be able to afford to have children'

Danelle is not alone. A major new YouGov survey*, carried out for the First Response Early Result Pregnancy Test campaign (firstresponsefertility.com), showed that money is a major factor in our decision to delay motherhood: nearly half (46 per cent) of women in Great Britain say the single main reason women delay motherhood is because of money and the costs involved in raising a child.

Recent figures from insurer LV=’s annual Cost of a Child report – which outlines the expense of raising a child until the age of 21 – found that it now costs a total of £222,000 – that’s £4,000 more than last year and £82,000 more than ten years ago. This total is set to hit £350,000 over the next decade. However, the calculations involved make the assumption that parents will stump up for university fees, which have more than doubled in ten years, and budgets for £16,000 per child for holidays and nearly £4,500 for pocket money, which are clearly not essential.

The problem may be that we are setting our expectations too high as to what we want to lavish on our children. In pre-recessionary times it was more achievable to have the house, the designer buggy, the 12 months of maternity leave. But our expectations seem to have remained stuck in that time frame while economic reality has moved on.



Total childcare costs have shot up from around £40,000 per child ten years ago to more than £63,000 today

Psychologist Dr Cecilia d’Felice believes the ‘Bugaboo mentality’ – where we feel our future offspring should be kitted out with top-of-the-range baby gear – is holding many would-be mothers back. ‘Our materialistic culture reflects the erroneous idea that what you buy for or do with your baby shows how much you love them,’ she says. ‘But of course there are many ways to show love to a baby, and a newborn doesn’t notice if it’s in a Bugaboo or not.

‘For many new mothers there is so much uncertainty after having a baby, leaving them stressed and scared, so buying all the kit is a way of reassuring themselves they are doing everything “right”. Since the birth of Prince George, there have been scores of media articles about new baby products aimed at people for whom money is no object, so consumer pressure is greater than ever for young mothers on realistic budgets. Being flexible, understanding that change is inevitable and letting go of unrealistic standards all help women to adapt and enjoy motherhood,’ says d’Felice.

For a generation of women wanting to ‘have it all’, sacrificing that hard-won career for a baby can feel like a big decision too. ‘To an ambitious, hard-working woman, having a baby can look like a series of major losses – loss of income, promotion, status and freedom – which all contribute to a hesitating culture when it comes to embracing family life,’ observes d’Felice. ‘The myth of “perfect” child-rearing, an invention of the advertising industry, has little to do with what babies really need and sets women up to feel like failures, whatever they do.’





'I'd always be worrying. “Can we pay the mortgage this month?”’

'I fear that if I leave it too long, I won't be able to have a baby'

Francesca Rees Dellow (right), 32, a full-time nanny from London, and her husband James, a youth worker and MA student, earn more than £50,000 between them, which on a national level is a decent income.



Despite feeling broody since her 20s, Francesca has put her baby dream on hold until they’re able to save up enough for her to afford a year’s maternity leave.



‘The mothers I work for can afford to take a year off on maternity leave, whereas if I didn’t save enough I’d have to be back at work within three months. Realistically, could I then take my baby to work with me? My mum would help out two or three days a week, but not full-time.’

Francesca and her husband part-own a two-bedroom flat under a shared-ownership scheme, which they chose with a view to raising a family. ‘It sounds like we earn a lot of money, but we have to pay rent and a mortgage and my husband is also paying off his student debt, so our outgoings are high.

'I just don’t feel that I’m where I want to be yet, in terms of being able to provide for a family. Ideally I’d like to have £2,000 saved up to cover all the new baby equipment and £5,000 to cover a year off. The longer I stay in this current job, the more I can save.’

Francesca knows she’s setting her standards high, but says she wants to replicate her own comfortable upbringing. ‘Maybe we could scrape by on one income for a while, but I don’t feel we could. I’d always be worrying, “Can we pay the mortgage this month?” It’d be a case of, “Right, I can’t buy that for the baby, because we need the money to pay the mortgage.”

‘The other option – moving out of London to a more affordable area – doesn’t appeal, as my mum lives 15 minutes from me and when I have a baby I would really like her support.’

Francesca worries that waiting for her savings to accumulate could mean paying a different price. ‘Fertility-wise, I’m not that old yet, but if I wait another couple of years it might be harder for me to have a baby. Like every woman, my greatest fear is that if I leave it too long I might have difficulty conceiving.’

'Ideally I’d like to have £7,000 saved to cover baby equipment and a year off'

The previous generation was less bothered about waiting for the perfect bank balance before taking the plunge. Maybe that’s because the cost of raising a child has since hit an all-time high.



Research from LV= shows more than three-quarters of parents have been forced to make cutbacks, with more than four in ten saying they’re curbing spending on luxuries such as holidays. Total childcare costs have also shot up from around £40,000 per child ten years ago to more than £63,000 today.

As well as prompting us to postpone motherhood, finances can be a key reason for parents deciding to remain a one-child family, according to a survey by the Office for National Statistics, which showed the number of families with just one dependent child has hit 47 per cent. It’s likely to rise to more than 50 per cent over the next decade.

But is it really worth sacrificing a sibling to give your sole heir the ‘perfect life’?

‘You often hear middle-class parents talk about wanting to provide the best possible life for their child, in terms of holidays and a private education, etc,’ says d’Felice. ‘Especially if you’ve had these things in your own life, there can be a strong sense that you should be able to do the same for your offspring. For some parents this feeling is so strong that they will stop at one child, rather than having two children and giving them what they perceive to be a “second-rate” lifestyle.’

Maybe the real problem is that today we are spoilt for choice. As Francesca says, ‘In our grandmothers’ day, children just didn’t have as much. I very much doubt whether my grandmother took my mum to any baby classes to develop her social skills – but I’d like to, just so I’m not home alone with my baby all the time!

‘There are so many things for babies now that you can charge parents a fortune for – and they seem to be willing to pay. I know that having a child should just be about love, not how many toys or gadgets they have, but the problem is we know what’s available – such as that buggy with an iPhone holder…’

Already Googling it? Stop right there.

firstresponsefertility.com

'I often wonder what my generation did wrong'

by Daisy Buchanan, 28

Daisy with her boyfriend Chris

I’d always dreamed of having a big family. I’m the eldest of six and loved growing up amid all the games, noise and fun that come with having five people to play with. But graduating in the middle of a recession means I’ve given up all hope of having children myself. In my early 20s, I believed that having a family would just happen when the time was right – all I had to do was work hard, get my career on track and look for the perfect partner. Surely meeting the right guy would be the hardest bit? But, ironically, getting together with my boyfriend Dale is what made me realise I would always be too broke for babies. We’re both writers, and although we love our jobs, we don’t earn enough to save. Most of our money is swallowed up by rent and bills – and things would become downright precarious if we had a baby to look after.

As freelancers we have no company maternity pay or paternity leave. We’ve considered changing careers, but that would push our dream even further out of reach, as retraining would cost money and eat into the time we need to spend earning. We know we’re lucky to be working at all – we’d probably struggle to find jobs in any industry we were newly qualified to work in.

The cost of childcare doesn’t make sense. If we spent £70 a day on a nursery and I worked three days a week, that would mean our childcare would cost nearly £1,000 a month, yet I would only earn about £1,200 a month working part-time, making just £200 profit. From that, I’d still need to pay £600 rent a month, plus another £150 for bills – so we’d be in the red from the moment the baby was born, and that’s before food.

Maybe one way of making it work would be asking my parents to help with childcare, but as they live in Dorset, this would mean moving in with them – tricky, as a lot of my work is London-based. Mum and Dad have only just stopped looking after children, and are enjoying their independence. It would be selfish for me to turn up on their doorstep with a baby and expect them to help out!

I couldn’t consider having children until I’d bought a house. When you’re renting, your landlord can put your rent up or sell the property at a moment’s notice. It’s a situation I have to put up with, but I could never force a child to endure the same insecurity.

It’s not as if I have a luxury lifestyle to give up. I’ve got used to worrying about money and I don’t mind having cereal for dinner every so often, but it would be irresponsible to have a child if there’s even a chance I wouldn’t be able to feed him or her properly. Growing up, I wasn’t spoiled but I felt secure. I knew my parents could feed and clothe us and there was always enough money left over for school trips, toys and piano lessons. I’m in awe of mothers who manage on little money. I don’t think kids need the latest toys and fashions, but I believe they need to know that their mum and dad will be able to look after them, no matter what.

I often wonder what my generation did wrong. My friends and I think ourselves lucky to be employed, even though we all worked hard at school and university because we’d been told that was the best route to a well-paid career. As the cost of living increases and salaries stay static, the situation seems hopeless. Some people might daydream about the lottery win that lets them buy a mansion – but my numbers need to come up soon if I’m ever going to have babies.