Topics: AlterNet, Income inequality, Middle Class, Poverty, Social Security, Business News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

There’s a scene in the 1935 film adaptation of Charles Dickens’ novel A Tale of Two Cities in which a horse-drawn carriage transporting a hated aristocrat runs over and kills a peasant child—and instead of expressing any remorse over the boy’s death, he’s worried that the boy might have injured his horse. It’s a powerful scene that speaks volumes about class oppression and the indifference that the 1% can have for the suffering of the poor. History has a painful way of repeating itself, and in 2015, it is open season on the working class and the poor in the United States. After the crash of September 2008—which brought about the U.S.’ worst economic crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s—the American working class desperately needed a vigorous New Deal 2.0. Instead, the Great Recession has brought us bank bailouts, corporate welfare, megabank mergers, deepening inequality, the U.S. Supreme Court’s disastrous Citizens Uniteddecision and Republicans in Congress who are determined to shred America’s social safety net as much as they can.

In this toxic economic environment, there are countless incidents of the haves kicking the have-nots when they’re already down. From Republican attacks on food stamps, Medicare and social security to mass incarceration to modern-day debtors’ prisons, the assault on the American working class has been relentless during the Great Recession. And one need only read the history books to understand the type of unrest that eventually occurs in such an environment.

Below are seven disgraceful incidents from 2014 and 2015 that show a “throw the peasants in the Bastille” mentality and say a lot about the cruel economic times we are living in.

1.Homeless Woman in Portland, Oregon Jailed For Charging Her Cell Phone in Planter Box

In Portland, the courts spent months prosecuting a homeless woman for—of all things—using an electrical outlet in a sidewalk planter box to charge her cell phone in July. The woman, who the website Street Roots News identified as “Jackie” (she didn’t want her real name used), was charged with theft. And when “Jackie” missed her arraignment (she was homeless, after all), a bench warrant was issued. Months later, she turned herself into police and spent a night in jail. “Jackie” (who had never been arrested before) was offered a plea bargain, which she turned down because she was on a waiting list for housing and feared that having a criminal record would jeopardize her chance at putting a roof over her head. Eventually, the theft charge was dropped, but the very fact that “Jackie” was arrested and prosecuted in the first place shows that the “throw the peasants in the Bastille” mentality is alive and well in the U.S.

2.Georgia Teenager Spends Five Days in Debtors’ Prison

Supposedly, the U.S. doesn’t have debtors’ prisons. But when Americans are jailed because they cannot afford to pay court fines and fees for minor infractions, that amounts to a modern-day version of the debtor’s prison. In December, 19-year-old DeKalb County, Georgia resident Kevin Thompson spent five days in jail when he couldn’t afford to pay, within 30 days, $838 in fines and fees related to a traffic ticket. On January 19, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) filed a lawsuit on Thompson’s behalf, arguing that debtors’ prisons are unconstitutional and that he was criminalized for being poor. And on March 18, a settlement was reached. Thompson v. DeKalb County was an important case because—as ACLU members have noted—what happened to Thompson was not an anomaly, but rather, exemplified a disturbing trend of jailing the poor for their inability to pay court fines and fees. The ACLU, in fact, was speaking out against this type of class oppression back in 2010, when it issued its report In for a Penny: The Rise of America’s New Debtors’ Prisons.

3. Sanitation Worker in Atlanta Suburb Jailed for Showing Up Too Early

Trash collection is not an easy job, but it’s certainly an important and necessary one. In Sandy Springs, Georgia, however, doing that job too well can result in a jail sentence. Trash collection has been totally privatized in that Atlanta suburb, where a city ordinance says that trash cannot be collected before 7 AM—and when Kevin McGill (who worked for a private company called Waste Management, Inc.) recently showed up just after 5 AM to do his job, he was arrested. In early March, McGill was sentenced to 30 days in jailbecause the local prosecutor insisted that a fine would be insufficient punishment. Welcome to the Tea Party’s America, where blue-collar workers are sentenced to jail for having a strong work ethic while corrupt banksters and Wall Street oligarchs who cause widespread suffering operate with impunity.