It’s that scary time of year again, when the hobgoblins that have lain dormant for more than 11 months crawl out of their creepy hiding places to frighten everyone.

Yes, it’s time for annual benefits enrollment.

It’s the opportunity for every state employee to change State Health Plan options, to add or cancel eligible dependents without a qualifying life event and to choose other offered benefits.

This year’s enrollment period begins Thursday and runs through Nov. 18. All changes become effective Jan. 1, 2016.

Employees can make changes via the MyPack portal on www.ncsu.edu or by phone by calling 1-855-859-0966.

NC State’s Human Resources Benefits Office says that because of some online enrollment system issues, state employees can expect some challenges while completing this year’s enrollment. So don’t wait until the last minute.

Rates through the State Health Plan have increased this year for the three insurance options: the 80/20 plan, the 70/30 plan and the Consumer Directed Health Plan (CDHP). The surcharges applied for not completing annual wellness credits have increased for 2016. Those enrolled in the 80/20 and CDHP must complete the wellness assessments again this year to receive credits that lower their monthly payment.

Please visit the State Health Plan website, read all distributed information, make your selections early and print confirmation materials from the online enrollment system.

Here are a few tips from the NC State HR Benefits Office:

The health assessment may not be linked directly through the State’s online enrollment system. You may be required to register and log onto the Personal Health Portal to complete/update the health assessment online. You may also complete the assessment via phone at 800-817-7044. Once completed, there will be a delay of several business days before the credit appears in the State’s online enrollment portal, so complete the health assessment early. If the health assessment is not linked via the enrollment website, the directions are detailed at the following webpage: https://shp.nctreasurer.com/Pages/Health-Assessment.aspx.

Due to the Affordable Care Act, you must list social security numbers (SSNs) for all dependents enrolled in your benefit plans. Make sure you have those numbers when you begin your Annual Enrollment process; the enrollment system will not allow you to add dependents without SSNs.

In addition to selecting a primary care provider for everyone on your health plan, you must also watch a short video about patient-centered medical homes. For those enrolling via phone, the video’s script will be read to you.

Within the health assessment, there is a question about smoking/tobacco use. This is not the tobacco attestation, which is another wellness task housed separately. To receive the tobacco attestation wellness credit, you must attest that you are a non-tobacco user or are in a tobacco cessation program to receive the wellness credit. You may call 1-800-QUITLINE to enroll in a tobacco cessation program.

The wellness credits (primary care provider, health assessment and tobacco attestation) must be completed by Wednesday, Nov.18, to receive the applicable credits for 2016. The State Health Plan does not allow any exceptions to this rule, and the university cannot alter any surcharges applied.

You may complete Annual Enrollment beginning Thursday, October 15 through Wednesday, Nov. 18, 2015 by logging onto MyPack Portal>For Faculty & Staff>Enroll in Benefits or by calling 1-855-859-0966.

And don’t forget, be careful out there.