New Details Emerge On Backpack With Access Health Data

HARTFORD — The backpack containing a notepad with names, birth dates and Social Security numbers of Access Health CT customers was left Thursday outside a downtown deli and found by a man who turned it into his legislator's office Friday morning, authorities said Monday as new details continued to emerge about the case.

The backpack contained information on more than 400 customers of Access Health CT, the state health exchange created by the federal Affordable Care Act.

An employee of Maximus, the exchange's call-center vendor, left work Thursday and went to New York Deli & More at 240 Trumbull St., where he apparently left the backpack outside, officials with both Maximus and Access Health CT said at a press conference Monday.

Inside the backpack was a notepad with the names of 413 people, Social Security numbers for 151 of those people, and an undisclosed number of birth dates, Access Health CT marketing chief Jason Madrak said Monday.

The Maximus employee left the deli about 4:30 p.m. Thursday, said Ilene Baylinson, president of the eastern region for Maximus. The employee got a ride home from a friend.

Before the deli closed at 7 p.m., a man brought the backpack into the deli and asked if workers would hold onto it, Alex Aldali, who works at the deli, said Monday. The owner of the deli wanted nothing to do with the backpack, Aldali said, so the man who brought it into the store left with it.

On Friday morning, House Republicans got a call from a man who wanted to turn in the backpack, said Pat O'Neil, a spokesman for House Republicans. The call was relayed from the switchboard to the office of Rep. Jay Case, R-Winchester, because the caller lives in Case's district. Case was not there, however.

A worker at Case's office took the call and received the backpack that morning, O'Neil said.

"At that point, we contacted Kevin Counihan directly, and he said, 'Oh, OK,' " O'Neil said, referring to the CEO of Access Health CT. An employee at Access Health CT went to the Legislative Office Building to retrieve the backpack and the information.

Friday afternoon, Access Health CT sent out an advisory about a possible security breach.

A representative at Maximus said Monday that it is reinforcing its policies in the aftermath of the security breach.

"The bottom line is that one of our team members made a mistake," Baylinson said. "He violated our corporate policies and procedures for handling personal data. Removing any personal data from our offices and facilities is strictly prohibited and this individual is now on administrative leave."

Baylinson added that the administrative leave will last until the police investigation is complete. The Maximus employee is "deeply sorry and has been fully cooperative with the investigation, and based upon what we know today, we have no reason to believe that any of this information was used for fraudulent purposes."

Maximus' standard procedure for hiring people includes a criminal background check, Baylinson said.

"This individual is extremely remorseful and very upset about the situation. He is one of our better employees," Baylinson said.