MIDLAND, MI — U.S. Rep. Dave Camp has named his choice to succeed him representing the voters of Michigan's 4th congressional district.

During a press call Tuesday, June 24, the Midland congressman announced his endorsement for State Sen. John Moolenaar, R-Midland.

"He's an honest, hard-working, proven conservative," Camp said. "He really has a great track record of really solid decision making."

Moolenaar said he is very proud to have the congressman's endorsement.

"Congressman Dave Camp is a giant in Congress and just beloved in our district," he said. "I'm going to work hard to earn the support of the voters of the 4th congressional district."

Moolenaar said one of the first things he will work on in Congress will be to repeal Obamacare.

Camp said Moolenaar has a good track record and an "independent voice," citing the state senator's strong opposition to implementation of Obamacare and state exchanges in Michigan. The congressman also pointed to the stabilization of Michigan's finances as a success achieved during Moolenaar's tenure.

"When he first got into office four years ago, we had a 1.8 billion dollar debt and now we have a surplus in the state of Michigan," Camp said. "That's the kind of leadership we could certainly use in Washington."

Moolenaar is one of three candidates vying for the Republican nomination to the seat in August's primary. In that contest, he will face off with Thomas Township businessman Paul Mitchell and Roscommon businessman Peter Konetchy.

In November's general election, the Republican nominee will run against Dr. Jeff Holmes, a family practitioner in Alma and the lone Democrat to file for the seat.

Camp's endorsement is not the first major one announced by Moolenaar. Last week, the Saginaw County Chamber of Commerce hosted a press conference in which Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette, also a Midland native, announced his endorsement of Moolenaar.

Mitchell's campaign has released several television advertisements, but has not yet announced any major endorsements. Konetchy has announced one endorsement thus far — Jack Hoogendyk, a former state representative and former candidate for Congress.

Konetchy was the first of the Republicans to declare his intention to run for the seat, which has been held for more than two decades by U.S. Rep. Dave Camp, R-Midland.

Camp announced on March 31 that he would not be seeking re-election to the seat. Moolenaar announced his intention to run the day after Camp's announcement.

About one week later, Mitchell announced his campaign for the seat.

Mark Tower covers local government for MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact him at 989-284-4807, by email at mtower@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.