NEWARK — A plan by the Transportation Safety Administration to cease guarding exit lanes from secured areas of airports will cost the agency that runs the region's three major airports $8 million a year, said a local group calling on the TSA to continue staffing the exit lanes.

"Our message to the TSA is clear — stop this plan. Their move is the embodiment of penny wise and pound foolish — impacting the maximum number of passengers while placing additional burdens on our local airports," said Global Gateway Alliance Chairman Joe Sitt. "The Federal government should be paying its fair share to the most critical airport system in the country, not further shirking its responsibility."

Effective Jan. 1, the TSA will end its long-standing practice of staffing exit lanes at some airports, including Newark Liberty, John F. Kennedy International and LaGuardia, under a measure intended to trim $88 million from its $7.5 billion budget for 2014. The agency said it was transferring responsibility to control exit lanes to local airport authorities, "in order to most efficiently use TSA’s limited resources and to focus on the priority of screening passengers and baggage."

The region's three major airports are run by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, whose revenues come mainly from rents paid by airport tenants and from tolls at its bi-state bridges and tunnels.

This afternoon, the regional airport advocacy group Global Gateway Alliance said staffing the exit lanes around the clock at dozens of checkpoints at the three airports would cost the Port Authority $8 million annually.

Airport security will be particularly important one month after the move goes into effect, the group said, when thousands of additional fliers crowd the airport en route to and from Super Bowl XLVIII on Feb. 2.

"Over the last decade, Homeland Security data shows that there have been 3,000 security breaches nationwide involving unscreened individuals gaining unauthorized access via exit lanes and security checkpoints," read a statement from the gateway group, whose executive director is the Port Authority's former chief spokesman, Stephen Sigmund. "While the TSA describes the idea as cost-effective, their plan saves approximately 1 percent of the TSA's $7.5 billion budget nationwide, while impacting the security of hundreds of millions of aviation passengers every year."

Exit lane security at Newark Liberty was highlighted in January 2010, when Rutgers graduate student Haisong Jiang ducked under a security belt after a guard had left his post in order to kiss his departing girlfriend. A witness notified authorities, prompting a shutdown that rippled around the world. In April 2012, Terminal B at Newark Liberty was partially evacuated after a British man walked past a "Do Not Enter" sign and a distracted TSA screener into a secured area.

Last month, U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) joined two Republican senators in a letter addressed to TSA Administrator John Pistole, asserting the measure would place “undue burdens” on airports forced to assume responsibility for securing exit lanes.

The TSA has defended the measure, noting that two-thirds of the nation’s airports already provide their own security at exit lanes, a responsibility the TSA says falls outside it primary mission of screening passengers and bags to prevent the downing of airliners.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Terminal at Newark airport evacuated after man enters secure area through exit



•N.J. man admits Newark Liberty airport security breach for goodbye kiss