HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Dennis Rodman sang 'Happy Birthday' to North Korean leader Kim Jong Un before leading a squad of former NBA stars for a friendly game Wednesday in Pyongyang, North Korea, as part of his 'basketball diplomacy' that has been criticized in the U.S. Kim Kwang Hyon/Associated Press …

OUTCRY: A woman reacted to hearing Wednesday that her husband was dead in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Her husband was riding on a bus that was hit by a bomb on Friday. Monirul Alam/Zuma Press …

POINTING FINGERS: A man pointed at Assistant Commissioner Mark Rowley, center, as he addressed the media and members of the public in London on Wednesday. Jurors at London's High Court found by a majority of eight to two that 29-year-old Mark Duggan was 'lawfully killed' when he was shot dead by a police marksman. His killing sparked the riots that raged in London in August 2011. Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images …

UP AND OVER: A baby was passed over a fence inside a camp housing displaced people at Mpoko Airport in Bangui, Central African Republic, Wednesday. Clashes between Christians and Muslims in the region have left hundreds dead. Rebecca Blackwell/Associated Press …

SHORT ON FUEL: People scuffled as they tried to fill fuel barrels during a diesel shortage in San'a, Yemen, Wednesday. Mohamed al-Sayaghi/Reuters …

COVERED UP: Two motorcyclists wore plastic bags to protect their faces from ash after an eruption of Mount Sinabung in North Sumatra, Indonesia, Wednesday. The volcano in northwest Indonesia has erupted more than 100 times since Saturday. Ulet Ifansasti/Getty Images …

MEETING THE REQUIREMENT: People in their underwear searched for clothes in Paris on Wednesday. Spanish fashion brand Desigual started a sale by offering the first 100 customers clothes for free as long as they showed up dressed only in their underwear. Christian Hartmann/Reuters …

ON THE ROAD: Alain Hermet raced during the Dakar Rally in Argentina on Tuesday. Victor R. Caivano/Associated Press …

OVER ART: A man jogged over the sculpture titled 'Wood Line' by artist Andy Goldsworthy on Tuesday in San Francisco. Marcio Jose Sanchez/Associated Press …

ACCIDENT BY THE SEA: People responded to the site of a helicopter crash in Cley-next-the-Sea, England, Wednesday. On Tuesday, a U.S. military helicopter crashed at the site, killing all four crew members. Jason Bye/European Pressphoto Agency …

FIRE ON THE RAILS: A man inspected an object inside a burned train carriage near Mumbai on Wednesday. A fire killed nine passengers as the blaze ripped through three carriages, a railway official said. Punit Paranjpe/AFP/Getty Images …

TEST DRIVE: People tried driving simulators at the Ford booth at the International Consumer Electronics Show on Wednesday in Las Vegas. Jae C. Hong/Associated Press …

TRIAL DELAYED: Police stood guard outside a police academy, where ousted Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi's trial was due to take place, in Cairo on Wednesday. His trial on charges of inciting murder was adjourned on Wednesday until next month, after bad weather prevented a helicopter flight from bringing Mr. Morsi to court. Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters …