In an effort to address a growing demand for behavioral health care in southeastern Wisconsin, Aurora Health Care plans to invest $35 million to renovate and expand services at its psychiatric hospital in Wauwatosa.

The health care system announced Oct. 2 its plans include increasing capacity for additional patients and staff through renovations and by adding a new parking structure to help ease current on-street parking congestion.

Additionally, Aurora Health Care plans to replace its aging residential substance abuse and rehabilitation facility, the Dewey Center, 1220 Dewey Ave., to increase patient capacity and consolidate the substance abuse treatment programming that is currently spread throughout the campus.

The expansion and enhancement program is slated to begin early next year and will reach completion by early 2018. Aurora will add 18 inpatient beds with the expansion — an increase from the 80 it has now.

Aurora also plans to replace its current, aging Alumni House with a new facility. The building serves as a short-term sober living facility for up to eight residents at any given time. The new facility's design will complement the character of the Aurora Psychiatric Hospital Campus.

Pete Carlson, president of Aurora Psychiatric Hospital and Behavioral Health Services, said the Affordable Care Act broadened coverage for behavioral health, allowing more people to obtain access.

"I think there have been improvements in the stigmatized approach that people feel about getting mental health care," Carlson said. "More people are willing to get care. The access has been problematic really for a long time."

Also as part of proposed enhancements, Aurora plans to renovate existing buildings on campus and upgrade deteriorating, inefficient building systems and mechanical infrastructure.

The Aurora Psychiatric Hospital has provided behavioral health services to the community for more than 133 years, Carlson said.

The services at Aurora Psychiatric Hospital Campus in Wauwatosa include inpatient, eating disorder, adult intensive inpatient and outpatient programs for depression and anxiety and substance abuse programs. The Wauwatosa campus serves 20,000 to 25,000 patients a year, Carlson said.