In a move designed to fatten the pockets of working Americans, the Obama administration is widening the tent on overtime regulations and opening up extra pay to millions of domestic employees.
The administration late Tuesday night announced the Department of Labor would be finalizing a new rule that effectively doubles the annual salary threshold above which companies can forgo paying overtime to employees who work more than 40 hours in a given week.
Under current regulations, individuals classified as executives and managers are exempt from overtime requirements, and salaried workers don't have to be paid overtime if they make at least $23,660 per year. The new rule would raise that baseline to $47,476 in a move the White House estimates would bring about 4.2 million American employees into the overtime fold and increase worker pay across the country by about $12 billion over the next 10 years.
The administration said the threshold also will be updated every three years and be tied to a segment of salaried workers in the lowest-income region of the country. The threshold is projected to exceed $51,000 by 2020.

RELATED CONTENT

China Is Buying Its Way Into the U.S. Economy

"If you work more than 40 hours a week, you should get paid for it or get extra time off to spend with your family and loved ones," President Barack Obama said in astatement. "For generations, overtime protections have meant that an honest day's work should get a fair day's pay, and that's helped American workers climb the ladder of success. That's what middle-class economics are all about."
Obama pointed out that inflationary pressures and regulatory tweaks over the last several decades have diminished who does and does not qualify for overtime pay. The White House estimates more than 60 percent of American workers qualified for overtime pay when regulations were revised back in 1975. Today, the government estimates only 7 percent of workers meet overtime qualifications.

Obama said his new rule is designed to "update and modernize" a regulatory system that he believes has unfairly restricted time-and-a-half pay for American workers.
"This is a step in the right direction to strengthen and secure the middle class by raising Americans' wages," Obama said. "When workers have more income, they spend it – often at businesses in their local community – and that helps grow the economy for everyone."

RELATED CONTENT

Fed Policies 'Probably' Increased Inequality, Former Official Says

The new rule is likely to be warmly welcomed by millions of American employees. A survey last year by Public Policy Polling found that 73 percent of more than 600 respondents said they would support "substantially increasing" Americans' paid overtime threshold. Sixty-five percent of respondents even said they'd support extending overtime to anyone who makes $75,000 or less annually.
"By restoring and strengthening working people's right to overtime pay, the Department of Labor is protecting millions of Americans from overwork, and making sure they get paid their fair share when they do work more than 40 hours in a week," Ross Eisenbrey, vice president of the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute, said in a statement Tuesday night.
But business owners have been a little less eager to embrace what amounts to a government-mandated pay raise. Some have previously argued that raising overtime eligibility would encourage more employers to classify their employees as hourly, which could ultimately reduce those employees' non-wage benefits. Others have said such a move will disincentivize low-wage employers from bringing on new employees.

David French, senior vice president for government relations at the National Retail Federation, called the new rule a "career killer."

RELATED CONTENT

Years Later, Psychological Scars From Great Recession Skew Spending

"In the real world – as opposed to D.C. conference rooms filled with career bureaucrats and political appointees – employers and employees will suffer the consequences of a policy rooted in pure politics," French said in a statement. "Overtime regulations need to be sensitive to cost-of-living differences throughout the country, moderate enough that they don't block the career ambitions of young people and middle managers working to climb the career ladder, and gradual enough that business owners can implement them without penalizing the very people they were intended to help."
French said the "one-size-fits-all approach" adopted by the Obama administration "means business trying to make ends meet in small towns across America are now expected to pay the same salaries as those in New York City."
The Competitive Enterprise Institute, a libertarian think tank, also sent a letter to Congress this week calling on lawmakers to "defund, block and otherwise nullify the Obama administration's effort to change our nation's overtime rules."
"Industries and organizations across the country – from universities to community care providers – would face drastic increases in labor costs as a result of the Obama administration's new interpretation of the Fair Labor Standards Act," the letter said, voicing support for Republican-led efforts that would require the government to spend more time analyzing the economic implications of broadened overtime regulations.
Congress has derailed Obama-led labor reform efforts before, so it's difficult to say what the exact fate of this latest rule will be.

The administration said it's expected to take effect Dec. 1.
